My friend Todd owes me a dollar. He has owed it to me for twelve months, and I fear there is little prospect of his ever returning it. I can clearly see whenever I meet him that he has forgotten that he owes me a dollar. He meets me in the same frank, friendly way as always. My dollar has clean gone out of his mind. I see that I shall never get it back. 

On the other hand, I know that I shall remember all my life that Todd owes me a dollar. It will make no difference, I trust, to our friendship. But I shall never be able to forget it. I do not know how it is with other people; but if any man borrows a dollar from me, I will carry the recollection of it to the grave. 

Let me relate what happened. Todd borrowed this dollar last year on the eighth of April (I mention the date in case this should ever meet Todd’s eye), just as he was about to leave for Bermuda. 

He needed a dollar in change to pay his taxi, and I lent it to him. It happened quite simply and naturally. I hardly realised it till  it was all over. He merely said, “Let me have a dollar, will you?” 

And I said, “Certainly, is a dollar enough?” I believe, in fact I know, that when Todd took that dollar he meant to pay it back. 

He sent me a note from Hamilton, Bermuda. I thought when 

I opened it that the dollar would be in it. But it was not. 

He merely said that the temperature was up to nearly a hundred. The figure misled me for a moment. 

Todd came back in three weeks. I met him near the train, not because of the dollar, but because I really respect him. I felt it would be nice for him to see someone waiting for him on the platform after being away for three weeks. I said, “Let's take a taxi to the club.” 

But he answered, “No, let’s walk.” 

We spent the evening together, talking about Bermuda. 

I was thinking of the dollar but of course, I did not refer to it. One simply cannot. I asked him what currency is used in Bermuda, and whether the American dollar goes at par. 

I put a slight emphasis on the American dollar, but found again that I could not bring myself to make any reference to it. It took me some time (I see Todd practically every day at my club) to realise that he had completely forgotten the dollar. I asked him one day what his trip cost him and he said that he had kept no accounts. A little later, I asked him if he felt settled down after his trip, and he said that he had practically forgotten about it. 

So I knew it was all over. 

In all this, I bear him no grudge. I have simply added him to the list of men who owe me a dollar and who have forgotten it. There are quite a few of them now. I make no difference in my demeanour to them, but I only wish that I could forget. 

I meet Todd very frequently. Only two nights ago, I met him out at dinner and he was talking, clearly without self-consciousness, about Poland. He said that Poland would never pay her debts. You would think a thing like that would have reminded him, wouldn’t you? But it did not seem to. 

But in the meantime, a thought—a rather painful thought—has begun to come into my mind at intervals. It is this. If Todd owes me a dollar and has forgotten it, it is possible that there must be men to whom I owe a dollar which I have forgotten. There may be a list of them. The more I think of it, the less I like it, because Tam quite sure that if I had once forgotten a dollar, I should never pay it on this side of the grave. 

If there are such men, I want them to speak out. Not all at once, but in reasonable numbers, and as far as can be, in alphabetical order. I will immediately write their names down on paper. 

I do not count here men who may have lent me an odd dollar over a bridge table—and I am not thinking (indeed, I am taking care not to think) of the man who lent me thirty cents to pay for  grudge a feeling of anger towards somebody because of something bad they had done to youin the past demeanour the way a person behaves self-consciousness feeling nervous about what other people may think a bottle of plain soda in the Detroit Athletic Club last month. 

I always find that there is nothing like plain soda after a tiring ride across the Canadian frontier, and that man who advanced that thirty cents knows exactly why I felt that I had done enough for him. But if any man ever lent me a dollar to pay for a taxi when 

I was starting for Bermuda, I want to pay it. 

More than that, I want to start a general movement, a BACK TO HONESTY movement, for paying all these odd dollars that are borrowed in moments of expansion. Let us remember that 

the greatest nations were built up on the rock basis of absolute honesty. 

In conclusion, may I say that I do particularly ask that no reader of this story will be careless enough to leave this copy around where it might be seen by Major Todd of the University Club of Montreal. 
