She had a very stern face and Harry‘s first thought was that this was not someone to cross.
Harry dodged the Smeltings stick and went to get the post.
‘An‘ don‘ ask me questions just now, I think I‘m gonna be sick.‘
‘Don‘t be silly, Vernon, she hates the boy.‘
He was sure it was the same one; it had the same markings around its eyes.
‘I met him outside the library. He said he‘d been looking for someone to practise that on.‘
‘And it‘s really none of your business,‘ said Harry.
‘Sending you your father‘s Cloak and everything?‘
I was starting for Bermuda, I want to pay it.
Their very last exam was History of Magic.
But Nimbus Two Thousands did not suddenly decide to buck their riders off.
I made the tea in the morning and later went out shopping.
‘That‘s not all. They‘re saying he tried to kill the Potters‘ son, Harry.
She bent down and gathered up the fallen books.
The hairs on the back of Harry‘s neck prickled.
‘Er - I need to be at King‘s Cross tomorrow to - to go to Hogwarts.‘
He bent and pulled the ring of the trapdoor, which swung up and open.
He was walking so fast he knew he was making more noise than was wise, but he didn‘t meet anyone.
He didn‘t blame her - if he‘d had a sister like that... but all the same, those people in cloaks ...
A couple of sparks flew out of its snout.
Ron gave a slight cough, which might have been hiding a snigger.
Perenelle (six hundred and fifty-eight).
There was suddenly a sound of more galloping from the other side of the clearing.
This lot were whispering excitedly, too, and he couldn‘t see a single collecting tin.
‘Be quiet, Ginny, and it‘s rude to point.‘
‘New students!‘ said the Fat Friar, smiling around at them.
‘No, it isn‘t,‘ said Harry thoughtfully.
The table on the right cheered and clapped as Hannah went to sit down at the Hufflepuff table.
After half an hour, night had really fallen and they couldn‘t carry on.
‘I‘ll use the Invisibility Cloak,‘ said Harry.
The Stone will transform any metal into pure gold.
‘No,‘ said Harry, startled by the odd question.
‘I think we‘ll be able to pull the door open,‘ said Ron, peering over the dog‘s back.
They frog-marched Percy from the room, his arms pinned to his sides by his jumper.
All Neville cared about was never going near the dog again.
Harry blew it - it sounded a bit like an owl.
Their mother suddenly became very stern.
They‘re deep, mind, centaurs ... they know things ... jus‘ don‘ let on much.
Professor McGonagall was again different.
‘STOP! I FORBID YOU!‘ yelled Uncle Vernon in panic.
On the opposite side of the chamber was a heavy, wooden door.
It was full of small, jewel-bright birds, fluttering and tumbling all around the room.
He shouted something about Quidditch fouls when Harry roughly shook him awake.
Perhaps because it was dark, he didn‘t recognise where he was at all.
I ran down the bazaar road to the station.
It was cool and dark in here, with lit windows all along the walls.
A rich man or a greedy man or a careful man wouldn’t keep his money under a pillow or mattress.
He didn‘t look at it, but after a moment he spoke to it.
‘That‘s your lookout, isn‘t it?‘ said Filch, his voice cracking with glee.
‘If he hadn‘t stolen Neville‘s Remembrall I wouldn‘t be in the team
Harry felt as if Devil‘s Snare was rooting him to the spot.
It seemed to be coming from a large metal tub in the sink.
‘Here I go - now, don‘t hang around once you‘ve won.‘
Something was moving inside; a funny clicking noise was coming from it.
The hat took a long time to decide with Neville.
Harry looked over his shoulder - but, still, no one was there.
‘Excuse me, Professor Flitwick, could I borrow Wood for a moment?‘
She followed Ron through the portrait hole, hissing at them like an angry goose.
There was no point in worrying Mrs Dursley, she always got so upset at any mention of her sister.
‘Sir - Professor Dumbledore? Can I ask you something?‘
‘You‘d think we dragged her along, wouldn‘t you?‘
‘I want to read it,‘ said Harry furiously, ‘as it‘s mine.‘
He put the receiver back down and stroked his moustache, thinking ... no, he was being stupid.
His aunt and uncle never spoke about them, and of course he was forbidden to ask questions.
Harry picked the shining, silvery cloth off the floor.
It had short legs thick as tree trunks with flat, horny feet.
He hummed ‘Tiptoe through the Tulips‘ as he worked, and jumped at small noises.
Three of us are killers, waiting hidden in line.
They went to bed exhausted, their throats sore.
Harry‘s eyes stung as the cold air rushed past them, but he kept them wide open.
I‘ll eat myself if you can find A smarter hat than me.
Harry didn‘t have a clue what was going on.
She stopped to draw a deep breath and then went ranting on.
‘Let‘s find an empty room, you wait ‘til you hear this ...‘
And then they heard it - a low grunting and the shuffling footfalls of gigantic feet.
The giant took a gulp of tea and wiped his mouth with the back of his hand.
‘Why would Snape do somethin‘ like that?‘
‘I shall see you soon, I expect, Professor McGonagall,‘ said Dumbledore, nodding to her.
Yeh‘d die of hunger tryin‘ ter get out, even if yeh did manage ter get yer hands on summat.‘
Even I had more markings on my face, though mine were mostly scars.
‘Shan‘t say nothing if you don‘t say please,‘ said Peeves in his annoying sing-song voice.
Harry lit a lamp to see his way along the rows of books.
Flagrid was so huge that he parted the crowd easily; all Flarry had to do was keep close behind him.
And the smile came by itself, without my knowing it.
Professor McGonagall was talking to Professor Dumbledore.
Headmaster: Albus Dumbledore (Order of Merlin, First Class, Grand Sore.
With Ron covered in the Cloak too, they had to walk much more slowly next night.
He had found what he was looking for in his inside pocket.
Harry was quite sure the unsettled feeling didn‘t have anything to do with work, though.
Ron stared as Harry brought it all back into the compartment and tipped it on to an empty seat.
He wore half-moon glasses, had a long crooked nose and flowing silver hair, beard and moustache.
‘Young Sirius Black lent it me. I‘ve got him, sir.‘
The Restricted Section was right at the back of the library.
He was wearing long robes, a purple cloak which swept the ground and high-heeled, buckled boots.
Fetchin‘ you - gettin‘ things from Gringotts - knows he can trust me, see.
‘Ah,‘ said Hagrid, fiddling nervously with his beard.
He, Ron and Hermione passed through the gateway together.
Harry had forgotten they still had detentions to do in the furore over the points they‘d lost.
‘Nice to see you haven‘t been brooding about that mirror ... been keeping busy ... excellent...‘
Harry leant over the side of his own bed and pulled the Cloak out from under it.
The three of them put their heads together to read the note.
The feast appeared suddenly on the golden plates, as it had at the start-of-term banquet.
Magic carpets all got punctures, have they?‘
He made several important telephone calls and shouted a bit more.
And now, over to Jim McGuffin with the weather.
The note was still wet from last night’s rain.
He clicked it again - the next lamp flickered into darkness.
Dudley and Harry shared a room with twin beds and damp, musty sheets.
His mother and father beamed at the sight of him.
Ronan and Bane came bursting through the trees, their flanks heaving and sweaty.
‘What happened?‘ Hermione asked him, leading him over to sit with Harry and Ron.
The moon was bright, but clouds scudding across it kept throwing them into darkness.
The speaker was a plump woman who was talking to four boys, all with flaming red hair.
‘Well done,‘ said George in a low voice.
‘And I don‘t suppose you‘re going to tell me why you‘re here, of all places?‘
‘Now, I want a nice fair game, all of you,‘ she said, once they were all gathered around her.
The following morning, notes were delivered to Harry, Hermione and Neville at the breakfast table.
Harry‘s broom had given a wild jerk and Harry swung off it.
‘Are you sure that‘s a real spell?‘ said the girl.
‘ He turned to Griphook. ‘Vault seven hundred and thirteen now, please, and can we go more slowly?‘
Ron and Hermione‘s cheers echoed around the high chamber.
The sky was quite clear now and the sea gleamed in the sunlight.
‘I‘ve seen you before!‘ said Harry, as Dedalus Diggle‘s top hat fell off in his excitement.
‘But why? What happened?‘ Harry asked urgently.
It was staring down Privet Drive as though it was waiting for something.
There was no doubt about it, Hagrid definitely didn‘t meet Harry‘s eyes this time.
‘Yes, don‘t stop now,‘ said Ron, ‘it‘s doing us so much good.‘
‘Do you not see that unicorn?‘ Firenze bellowed at Bane.
What would the Dursleys say when he turned up on the doorstep?
He realised he must be in the hospital wing.
There was already someone there - but it wasn‘t Snape.
‘It‘s - all - my - ruddy - fault!‘ he sobbed, his face in his hands.
Harry made his way down to the end-of-year feast alone that night.
‘Pay him,‘ Hagrid grunted into the sofa.
Before Ron could answer, Professor Flitwick appeared at Malfoy‘s elbow.
Ron was standing there with his wand still raised, staring at what he had done.
‘... roaring along like maniacs, the young hoodlums,‘ he said, as a motorbike overtook them.
The rest of them were all quite happy to join in Dudley‘s favourite sport: Harry-hunting.
She opened the door and poked her head inside.
‘She must‘ve noticed she‘s got no friends.‘
Harry spotted Professor Quirrell, too, the nervous young man from the Leaky Cauldron.
Professor McGonagall pulled out a lace handkerchief and dabbed at her eyes beneath her spectacles.
‘But who‘d be that desperate?‘ he wondered aloud.
‘The unicorn‘s dead, Hagrid, it‘s in that clearing back there.‘
Vampires? Hags? Harry‘s head was swimming.
Our heads could do with filling With some interesting stuff,
Nothing like this man had ever been seen in Privet Drive.
‘Even - blimey - Dumbledore‘s come to watch!‘
‘I‘m going to see what section he was in,‘ said Ron, who‘d had enough of working.
As Neville walked away Harry looked at the Famous Wizard card.
‘It shouldn‘t be too difficult - I think the Cloak‘s big enough to cover two of us and Norbert.‘
Then he noticed a grubby little package wrapped up in brown paper lying on the floor.
‘He‘s doing something - jinxing the broom,‘ said Hermione.
‘Why is he with you? Where are your parents?‘
‘So we‘ve just got to try on the hat!‘ Ron whispered to Harry.
Harry sank down next to the bowl of peas.
Peering around it, however, they saw not Percy but Snape.
I met him near the train, not because of the dollar, but because I really respect him.
At the start-of-term banquet, Harry had got the idea that Professor Snape disliked him.
‘He‘s just the build for a Seeker, too,‘ said Wood, now walking around Harry and staring at him.
‘It‘s OK!‘ he called up to the light the size of a postage stamp which was the open trapdoor.
‘Go on then, try and hit me!‘ said Neville, raising his fists.
‘I‘m - er - not supposed ter do magic, strictly speakin‘.
‘They say there‘s dragons guardin‘ the high-security vaults.
‘I don‘t want to stay here alone, the Bloody Baron‘s been past twice already.‘
A magic wand ... this was what Harry had been really looking forward to.
He shivered and turned over, trying to get comfortable, his stomach rumbling with hunger.
As they stepped into the corridor, Filch‘s face loomed suddenly out of the darkness.
He reached out a hand and felt the air behind him.
Neville went bright red but turned in his seat to face Malfoy.
It got to its feet and came swiftly towards him - he couldn‘t move for fear.
When I was in the street, I began to run.
He could go anywhere in this, anywhere, and Filch would never know.
‘All right, but I warn yeh, he‘s a coward,‘ said Hagrid.
Harry shook hands again and again - Doris Crockford kept coming back for more.
Somehow - incredibly - he‘d got the Stone.
‘Malfoy tricked you,‘ Hermione said to Harry.
‘I‘ve still got the pieces, though,‘ he added brightly.
He had his eyes fixed on Harry and was muttering non-stop under his breath.
Next morning at breakfast, everyone was rather quiet.
‘What are you doing? You have a human on your back! Have you no shame? Are you a common mule?‘
I crept noiselessly to the head of the bed.
‘Scabbers has been fighting, not us,‘ said Ron, scowling at her.
Mrs Dursley came into the living-room carrying two cups of tea.
When Harry walked in there was a sudden hush and then everybody started talking loudly at once.
Only his eyes were moving, looking at them in horror.
‘Get the post, Dudley,‘ said Uncle Vernon from behind his paper.
Harry scrambled to his feet, so happy he felt as though a large balloon was swelling inside him.
It was a shame, but as Ron said, you couldn‘t have everything in life.
‘I start training next week,‘ said Harry.
Hagrid, like Ron, told Harry not to worry about it, that Snape liked hardly any of the students.
Madam Malkin was a squat, smiling witch dressed all in mauve.
Danger lies before you, while safety lies behind,
The horse pawed the ground and the knight turned his helmeted head to look down at Ron.
‘Wish McGonagall favoured us,‘ said Harry.
Professor McGonagall slammed the door behind him and turned to face the two boys.
‘Not Slytherin, eh?‘ said the small voice.
It seemed to be a handsome, leather-covered book.
‘You haven‘t got a letter on yours,‘ George observed.
‘I AM NOT PAYING FOR SOME CRACKPOT OTD FOOT TO TEACH HIM MAGIC TRICKS!‘ yelled Uncle Vernon.
Dudley stood with his nose pressed against the glass, staring at the glistening brown coils.
‘We‘re looking for a big, old-fashioned one - probably silver, like the handle.‘
Dudley tried to grab the letter to read it, but Uncle Vernon held it high out of his reach.
He knew but neither his lips nor his eyes said anything about their knowing.
‘Well, I just thought ... maybe ... it was something to do with ... you know ... her lot.‘
They stopped to buy parchment and quills.
‘Still got yer letter, Harry?‘ he asked as he counted stitches.
He caught himself in time and hovered about a foot off the stairs.
‘Oh, you know about Nicolas?‘ said Dumbledore, sounding quite delighted.
Harry pushed his trolley off down the platform in search of an empty seat.
Underneath the picture was the name Albus Dumbledore.
Uncle Vernon didn‘t go to work that day.
‘Caput Draconis,‘ said Percy, and the portrait swung forward to reveal a round hole in the wall.
These tables were laid with glittering golden plates and goblets.
‘Why aren‘t you supposed to do magic?‘ asked Harry.
‘I saw you and Snape in the Forest -‘ he blurted out.
‘Jus‘ lookin‘,‘ he said, in a shifty voice that got their interest at once.
‘Yer great puddin‘ of a son don‘ need fattenin‘ any more, Dursley, don‘ worry.‘
‘Yeah, you‘ll be needin‘ one,‘ said Hagrid, ‘but we gotta get yer money first.
‘Nearly Headless? How can you be nearly headless?‘
The troll stopped next to a doorway and peered inside.
They had just finished when the owner of the hotel came over to their table.
After lunch they went to the reptile house.
‘Are you really Harry Potter?‘ Ron blurted out.
He had been to school, after all, and his marks weren‘t bad.
A woman standing right behind his reflection was smiling at him and waving.
Hagrid looked as if he was about to explode.
In a great rush of excitement he dived downwards after the streak of gold.
‘How come Percy gets new robes, anyway?‘ said one of the twins.
‘Everyone pick their favourite tune,‘ said Dumbledore, ‘and off we go!‘
‘Well, I got back all right,‘ said Hermione.
‘Double Potions with the Slytherins,‘ said Ron.
‘Now what am I going to do?‘ she asked shrilly.
‘You think it - wise - to trust Hagrid with something as important as this?‘
‘I want to go to the feast,‘ he told Madam Pomfrey as she straightened his many sweet-boxes.
Someone had poked Ron in the back of the head.
‘Which way did they go, Peeves?‘ Filch was saying.
‘There‘s light ahead - I can see something moving.‘
His broom gave a sudden, frightening lurch.
‘Now what?‘ said Aunt Petunia, looking furiously at Harry as though he‘d planned this.
‘Don‘t you call me an idiot!‘ said Neville.
‘I see the Stone ... I‘m presenting it to my master ... but where is it?‘
‘That‘s not ages, that‘s like a second to Nicolas Flamel.‘
‘I suggest you all go back outside and enjoy the sunshine.‘
‘I‘m sure Firenze thought he was acting for the best,‘ he said, in his gloomy voice.
Harry hung back for a last word with Ron and Hermione.
They watched the birds soaring overhead, glittering - glittering?
Anything to get rid of Norbert - and Malfoy.
Behind the wild beard and eyebrows he wore a very kind smile.
‘Rubeus! Rubeus Hagrid! How nice to see you again ... Oak, sixteen inches, rather bendy, wasn‘t it?‘
Hermione‘s lip trembled and she suddenly dashed at Harry and threw her arms around him.
‘Just as long as we‘re not wiping you off the pitch,‘ said Hermione.
There‘s a unicorn in there bin hurt badly by summat.
‘Are there many of than in here?‘ asked Hermione.
‘Well, I‘ll see you at Hogwarts, I suppose,‘ said the drawling boy.
Flaming Christmas puddings followed the turkey.
As usual when he was indoors, Hagrid looked too big to be allowed.
‘We‘ve come ter take some money outta Mr Harry Potter‘s safe.‘
‘Three Chasers, one Keeper,‘ said Harry, who was determined to remember it all.
‘Percy!‘ hissed Ron, pulling Harry behind a large stone griffin.
‘What on earth were you thinking of?‘ said Professor McGonagall, with cold fury in her voice.
Harry couldn‘t think of anything to say to comfort him.
Snape was shaking Professor McGonagall‘s hand, with a horrible forced smile.
‘What? My - my mum and dad weren‘t famous, were they?‘
Mrs Dursley fell asleep quickly but Mr Dursley lay awake, turning it all over in his mind.
A sudden slamming and loud footsteps made the three of them look up.
‘The Chasers throw the Quaffle and put it through the hoops to score,‘ Harry recited.
‘I‘ve never asked,‘ said Nearly Headless Nick delicately.
‘Slytherin in possession,‘ Lee Jordan was saying.
She pointed at the last and youngest of her sons.
‘Sorry?‘ barked Hagrid, turning to stare at the Dursleys, who shrank back into the shadows.
Wishing he‘d been a bit quicker at thinking up some story, Harry left the library.
Hagrid folded up his newspaper and they clambered up the stone steps on to the street.
A sign overhead said Hogwarts Express, 11 o‘clock.
‘A bit. Well, that‘s something.‘ Ronan sighed.
‘Potter, I know what I‘m talking about,‘ she said shortly.
They were in a narrow stone passageway lit with flaming torches.
He would still be asleep, blissfully unaware of his loss.
‘I never thought to look in here!‘ she whispered excitedly.
I was thinking of the dollar but of course, I did not refer to it.
Didn‘t dare try takin‘ the school, not jus‘ then, anyway.
Hagrid‘s big hairy face appeared in the crack as he pulled the door open.
He let them in, struggling to keep a hold on the collar of an enormous black boarhound.
Peeves almost fell out of the air in shock.
Even Aunt Petunia didn‘t dare ask where they were going.
‘Right. It‘s time. Good luck, all of you.‘
Outside the apothecary‘s, Hagrid checked Harry‘s list again.
When Harry pulled back his sheets, he found his Invisibility Cloak folded neatly underneath them.
Wood reached into the crate and took out the fourth and last ball.
It also produces the Elixir of Life, which will make the drinker immortal.
Ron wanted to skip Herbology and go straight down to the hut.
A large black and silver volume caught his eye.
‘Who‘s there?‘ he said suddenly as they climbed towards him.
‘We‘ve got to go to Dumbledore,‘ said Harry.
‘So proud, Mr Potter, I‘m just so proud.‘
It was empty, but a door stood ajar at the other end.
‘The Sorting Hat chose you for Gryffindor, didn‘t it? And where‘s Malfoy? In stinking Slytherin.‘
Hagrid was drinking deeply from his goblet.
At the very end of the corridor hung a portrait of a very fat woman in a pink silk dress.
‘The Potters, that‘s right, that‘s what I heard -‘ yes, their son, Harry -‘
‘Thanks, Seamus,‘ said Harry, watching Seamus pile ketchup on his sausages.
Harry and Hermione tried to calm Ron down.
Harry could have laughed out loud with relief.
‘Oh, honestly, don‘t you two read? Look - read that, there.‘
‘Little tyke,‘ chortled Mr Dursley as he left the house.
Yet again, Ronan took a while to answer.
‘They have enough Elixir stored to set their affairs in order and then, yes, they will die.‘
‘Professor Dumbledore will be back tomorrow,‘ she said finally.
He didn‘t feel sorry for himself at all; this would probably be the best Christmas he‘d ever had.
At the end nearest him sat Hagrid, who caught his eye and gave him the thumbs-up.
All the revision he had to do kept his mind off his misery.
Malfoy was only a few feet away and he had stopped dead to listen.
‘I think it‘s just been knocked out.‘ He bent down and pulled his wand out of the troll‘s nose.
‘If we just do a bit of poking around -‘
They walked in silence, their eyes on the ground.
Cups, shields, plates and statues winked silver and gold in the darkness.
At that moment Neville toppled into the common room.
Harry and Ron exchanged looks with raised eyebrows.
Malfoy grinned broadly at Crabbe and Goyle.
Sir Nicholas looked extremely miffed, as if their little chat wasn‘t going at all the way he wanted.
‘Morning,‘ said Hagrid to a free goblin.
Gryffindors up and down the table were beside themselves - they were a hundred points up.
A giant of a man was standing in the doorway.
Something bright white was gleaming on the ground.
‘Professor Dumbledore is a very great wizard, Potter, he has many demands on his time -‘
He looked back at the snake and winked, too.
Then it flew off through the open window.
Neville‘s robes had barely whipped round the corner when they heard Filch enter the trophy room.
But Dumbledore let me stay on as gamekeeper.
‘Shut up, I‘m trying to remember how to kill it!‘ said Hermione.
There was an inscription carved around the top: Erised stra ehru oyt ube cafru oyt on wohsi.
Harry shook his head and the boy sat down.
‘Should call Filch, I should, if something‘s a-creeping around unseen.‘
‘This mirror is the key to finding the Stone,‘ Quirrell murmured, tapping his way around the frame.
He had a funny feeling he‘d had the same dream before.
‘Ah, Hagrid, the last tree - put it in the far corner, would you?‘
They shrank into the shadows and watched as it emerged into a patch of moonlight.
The passageway sloped downwards and Harry was reminded of Gringotts.
After a while, he walked away from the crowd of spectators.
‘Well - I remember a lot of green light, but nothing else.‘
A low rumbling sound had broken the silence around them.
‘We should have got more than ten points,‘ Ron grumbled.
He was busy rummaging in his cloak, looking for something.
He didn‘t say another word on the subject as they went upstairs to bed.
Moonlight seeped in from the verandah and fell across the bed.
He sat up and Hagrid‘s heavy coat fell off him.
He thought of Hagrid, expelled but allowed to stay on as gamekeeper.
‘Yes, yes, that‘s right,‘ said Professor Flitwick, beaming at Harry.
‘Miss Granger, five points will be taken from Gryffindor for this,‘ said Professor McGonagall.
As soon as he found his voice he said, ‘Blown up? You told me they died in a car crash!‘
The escape of the Brazilian boa constrictor earned Harry his longest-ever punishment.
‘Unless you‘d like to tell us and save us the trouble?‘ Harry added.
But I just hung around smiling quietly and then he couldn’t help laughing.
Yours sincerely, Minerva McGonagall Deputy Headmistress
The Leaky Cauldron had suddenly gone completely still and silent.
I found myself on the maidan and sat down on a bench.
Harry looked down at his empty gold plate.
‘Mmm,‘ said Harry, wishing he could say something a bit more interesting.
‘Very secret. Hogwarts business. Dumbledore‘s trusted me. More‘n my job‘s worth ter tell yeh that.‘
If there are such men, I want them to speak out.
‘I suppose you think you‘re harder to get past than a pack of enchantments!‘ she stormed.
He caught sight of them and gave a squeal of delight.
‘Give it to me. Five points from Gryffindor.‘
Uncle Vernon dumped Harry‘s trunk on to a trolley and wheeled it into the station for him.
‘No - I‘m alone - but I‘m different - I look older - and I‘m Head Boy!‘
It was sitting as still as a statue, its eyes fixed unthinkingly on the far corner of Privet Drive.
‘You can‘t go out,‘ said Neville, ‘you‘ll be caught again. Gryffindor will be in even more trouble.‘
Harry moved in front of the tank and looked intently at the snake.
‘Follow me,‘ said Filch, lighting a lamp and leading them outside.
‘That‘s why yer late, is it?‘ said Hagrid, frowning at Filch.
‘Because he‘s a Prefect,‘ said their mother fondly.
Harry was almost glad that the exams weren‘t far away.
Fifteen brooms rose up, high, high into the air.
‘Should‘ve thought of them werewolves before you got in trouble, shouldn‘t you?‘
Harry saw, as though in slow motion, the ball rise up in the air and then start to fall.
‘Ouch!‘ Harry clapped a hand to his head.
He meets me in the same frank, friendly way as always.
‘The first-years, Professor McGonagall,‘ said Hagrid.
The crystal trophy cases glimmered where the moonlight caught them.
A ghost wearing a ruff and tights had suddenly noticed the first-years.
‘Can‘t a person eat in peace in this place?‘ said Ron.
‘Mars is bright tonight,‘ he said simply.
‘And come back and find the house in ruins?‘ she snarled.
Harry privately agreed, though the thought didn‘t cheer him up at all.
‘I? I see myself holding a pair of thick, woollen socks.‘
Yet here it was, a letter, addressed so plainly there could be no mistake:
The sky had turned light before they stopped talking.
Things didn‘t improve for the Gryffindors as the Potions lesson continued.
‘I know,‘ Harry murmured through the glass, though he wasn‘t sure the snake could hear him.
‘Of course he has,‘ said Ron, wheeling round.
My free hand was resting on the bed and his hair touched my fingers.
It took quite a while for them all to get off the platform.
‘You said You-Know-Who‘s name!‘ said Ron, sounding both shocked and impressed.
Peeves stuck out his tongue and vanished, dropping the walking sticks on Neville‘s head.
‘You can take the Cloak, I won‘t need it now.‘
It wasn‘t really a tune, but from the first note the beast‘s eyes began to droop.
Harry clapped loudly with the rest as Ron collapsed into the chair next to him.
He‘d never had such a bad day in his life.
As Harry moved aside he felt the Philosopher‘s Stone against his leg.
Breathing very fast, he turned slowly back to the mirror.
The owl swooped in and dropped the newspaper on top of Hagrid, who didn‘t wake up.
‘Miss Granger, you foolish girl, how could you think of tackling a mountain troll on your own?‘
But when I took the note, I realised that he knew everything.
‘Thank you, Hagrid. I will take them from here.‘
Harry could hear running water; there must be a stream somewhere close by.
‘Can‘t be too careful, Ronan,‘ said Hagrid, patting his crossbow.
It was as though the broom was trying to buck him off.
‘I haven‘t eaten for nearly five hundred years,‘ said the ghost.
‘I heard you went to live with Muggles,‘ said Ron.
That third night he found his way more quickly than before.
Then my hand explored the mattress, found the edge and slipped the notes under it.
He had decided to call her Hedwig, a name he had found in A History of Magic.
By eleven o‘clock the whole school seemed to be out in the stands around the Quidditch pitch.
I can clearly see whenever I meet him that he has forgotten that he owes me a dollar.
With one great leap, Harry managed to grab the key, slam the door and lock it.
‘But I heard you a few days ago, sobbing - I thought Snape was threatening you ...‘
Each of them was pushing a trunk like Harry‘s in front of him - and they had an owl.
She held up a letter so they could read the green ink address:
But what they were, they didn‘t find out.
‘You can see them any old time,‘ said Ron.
‘Get out, both of you,‘ croaked Uncle Vernon, stuffing the letter back inside its envelope.
Easily the most boring lesson was History of Magic, which was the only class taught by a ghost.
A storm of cheering and stamping broke out from the Slytherin table.
Harry stared as Dumbledore sidled back into the picture on his card and gave him a small smile.
‘On holiday in Majorca,‘ snapped Aunt Petunia.
‘Always the innocent are the first victims,‘ he said.
It was swelteringly hot, especially in the large classroom where they did their written papers.
Only the sea and the whistling wind could be heard.
Hagrid called, ‘Who is it?‘ before he let them in and then shuthe door quickly behind them.
Malfoy, it seemed, had sneaked up behind Neville and grabbed him for a joke.
Neville clutched the sleeve of Harry‘s robe and made a choking noise.
They followed Professor McGonagall across the flagged stone floor.
Arun sighed in his sleep and turned on his side, towards me.
‘Who‘s that teacher talking to Professor Quirrell?‘ he asked Percy.
Her black hair was drawn into a tight bun.
Mr Dursley was the director of a firm called Grunnings, which made drills.
Professor McGonagall, in a tartan dressing-gown and a hairnet, had Malfoy by the ear.
‘Harry where have you been?‘ Hermione squeaked.
Harry crossed his fingers under the table and a second later the hat had shouted, ‘GRYFFINDOR!‘
The snow still hadn‘t melted next morning.
His eyes fell on the empty grate with the shrivelled crisp packets in it and he snorted.
‘Give it here,‘ Harry called, ‘or I‘ll knock you off that broom!‘
Too tired to talk much, they pulled on their pyjamas and fell into bed.
He wanted to say something to defend himself, but there seemed to be something wrong with his voice.
‘I‘ll kill Fred, he was going on about wrestling a troll.‘
‘Harry, you need your strength,‘ said Seamus Finnigan.
Harry realised his mouth was open and closed it quickly.
His broom had started to roll over and over, with him only just managing to hold on.
Gryffindor cheers filled the cold air, with howls and moans from the Slytherins.
Hagrid made them tea and offered them stoat sandwiches, which they refused.
Harry forced himself to keep looking straight into those cold eyes.
The chessmen parted and bowed, leaving the door ahead clear.
A pale young man made his way forward, very nervously.
‘Don‘t know why he‘s so bothered,‘ said Ron.
Wriggling and flailing, it unravelled itself from their bodies and they were able to pull free.
What Harry feared most was that he might not be able to find the mirror room again.
‘Nicolas Flamel,‘ she whispered dramatically, ‘is the only known maker of the Philosopher‘s Stone!‘
‘Oh, come off it, you don‘t think we‘d let you go alone?‘
‘What would you know about it, Weasley you couldn‘t afford half the handle,‘ Malfoy snapped back.
They were still with me but had gone damp with rainwater.
The Journey from Platform Nine and Three-Quarters 73
Ron had fallen asleep in the dark common room, waiting for them to return.
She was already wearing her new Hogwarts robes.
‘Is he - a bit mad?‘ he asked Percy uncertainly.
He strode out of sight; Harry didn‘t think Quirrell had even noticed him.
Neville‘s jaws were jammed together so he couldn‘t speak.
‘She might not have needed saving if we hadn‘t locked the thing in with her,‘ Harry reminded him.
Professor McGonagall peered sternly over her glasses at Harry.
First, however slyly the poison tries to hide You will always find some on nettle wine‘s left side;
‘Don‘t tell me you‘d never heard of Dumbledore!‘ said Ron.
Ron had a piece of steak-and-kidney pie halfway to his mouth, but he‘d forgotten all about it.
He was still determined not to mention anything to his wife.
Mr Ollivander fixed Harry with his pale stare.
There was so much to learn that even people like Ron didn‘t have much of a head start.
‘Got time fer a bite to eat before yer train leaves,‘ he said.
‘Peeves,‘ he said, in a hoarse whisper, ‘the Bloody Baron has his own reasons for being invisible.‘
‘You must be Harry‘s family!‘ said Mrs Weasley.
He pushed open the portrait of the Fat Lady and climbed through the hole.
The giant squeezed his way into the hut, stooping so that his head just brushed the ceiling.
He hoped the roof wasn‘t going to fall in, although he might be warmer if it did.
‘You don‘t want me as your enemy Quirrell,‘ said Snape, taking a step towards him.
The pain had gone as quickly as it had come.
‘Funny stuff on the news,‘ Mr Dursley mumbled.
‘NEVER -‘ he thundered, IN SUET - ALBUS - DUMBLEDORE - IN - FRONT - OF - ME!‘
‘Harry Potter, do you know what unicorn blood is used for?‘
‘In a manner of speaking,‘ said Uncle Vernon.
I awoke late next morning to find that Arun had already made the tea.
No more cooking his meals, running to the bazaar, or learning to write whole sentences.
‘Let‘s forget it and go back.‘ ‘No!‘ Harry hissed.
They passed the ghost of a tall witch gliding in the opposite direction, but saw no one else.
Harry was halfway towards it before he remembered what he‘d promised himself about not meddling.
‘That car‘s new, he‘s not sitting in it alone ...‘
Harry took out his wand in case Malfoy leapt in and started at once.
He was a big, beefy man with hardly any neck, although he did have a very large moustache.
He had the nasty feeling they were being watched.
‘Be grateful if yeh didn‘t mention that ter anyone at Hogwarts,‘ he said.
His eyes were black like Hagrid‘s, but they had none of Hagrid‘s warmth.
‘But there aren‘t wild dragons in Britain?‘ said Harry.
‘Don‘ mind if it wriggles a bit, I think I still got a couple o‘ dormice in one o‘ the pockets.
‘Kept what from me?‘ said Harry eagerly.
‘What can you see?‘ Hermione said anxiously.
‘Yes ...‘ said Ron softly, ‘it‘s the only way ... I‘ve got to be taken.‘
‘Would you mind moving out of the way?‘ came Malfoy‘s cold drawl from behind them.
Those cunning folk use any means to achieve their ends.
Arun had put his money where it would be child’s play for me to remove it without his knowledge.
From an inside pocket of his black overcoat he pulled a slightly squashed box.
‘Don‘t leave me!‘ said Neville, scrambling to his feet.
Hermione marched away with her nose in the air.
He had been hugged by a complete stranger.
‘That‘s the house Vol- I mean, You-Know-Who was in?‘
TheWeasleys complained that Wood was becoming a fanatic, but Harry was on Wood‘s side.
He gave his father a sharp tap on the head with his Smeltings stick.
Their first real shock came when their other knight was taken.
Harry couldn‘t believe anyone could be so interfering.
Harry looked quickly over his shoulder and saw the archway shrink instantly back into solid wall.
They couldn‘t afford to waste any more time, Snape might even now be playing Fluffy to sleep.
But if any man ever lent me a dollar to pay for a taxi when.
‘Wandering around at midnight, ickle firsties? Tut, tut, tut. Naughty, naughty, you‘ll get caughty.‘
He was now dangling from it, holding on with only one hand.
They could hear footsteps, Filch running as fast as he could towards Peeves‘s shouts.
‘Can you see all your family standing around you?‘
‘Aaah, has ickle Ronnie got somefink on his nosie?‘ said one of the twins.
‘I‘d like to see your mum and dad,‘ Ron said eagerly.
Behind him stood Aunt Petunia and Dudley, loing terrified at the very sight of Harry.
‘Everyone see here, Miss Granger‘s done it!‘
‘We won! You won! We won!‘ shouted Ron, thumping Harry on the back.
He lowered himself through the hole until he was hanging on by his fingertips.
‘Snape‘s a Hogwarts teacher, he‘d do nothin‘ of the sort.
You would think a thing like that would have reminded him, wouldn’t you? But it did not seem to.
They turned to go back outside, but Snape called them back.
The forbidden corridor on the third floor.
He‘d really done something to be proud of now - no one could say he was just a famous name any more.
Harry had a lot of trouble keeping his mind on his lessons that day.
‘They‘ve never lost a hundred and fifty points in one go, though, have they?‘ said Harry miserably.
Although he could tell it was daylight, he kept his eyes shut tight.
‘Don‘t ask questions!‘ snapped his uncle.
‘What‘s that?‘ said one of the twins suddenly, pointing at Harry‘s lightning scar.
They hadn‘t even reached the end of the corridor when Hermione caught up with them.
‘Keep out of the way until you catch sight of the Snitch,‘ Wood had said.
‘Good - well, look, Neville, we‘ve got to be somewhere, we‘ll see you later -‘
‘Tell yeh what, come with me an‘ see the Great Hall, looks a treat.
‘Did something happen to it when Flint blocked him?‘ Seamus whispered.
‘Took yeh from the ruined house myself, on Dumbledore‘s orders. Brought yeh ter this lot ...‘
‘So - that‘s sort of like basketball on broomsticks with six hoops, isn‘t it?‘
He was looking very peculiar in a large purple turban.
But I was nearly back on the street that night.
He wanted Quidditch through the Ages back, to take his mind off his nerves about tomorrow.
‘Come on, Hermione,‘ Ron muttered desperately.
Slowly, the room emptied as people drifted off to bed.
What was going on? Where were the others?
Harry put the plates of egg and bacon on the table, which was difficult as there wasn‘t much room.
Malfoy looked at Crabbe and Goyle, sizing them up.
It was a few seconds before he noticed anything about the room he had hidden in.
Hermione, however, stood alone by the door, waiting for them.
She stood in the middle of the pitch, waiting for the two teams, her broom in her hand.
A disgusting smell filled their nostrils, making both of them pull their robes up over their noses.
Then a small voice came out of the shadows.
‘Let‘s try again. Potter, where would you look if I told you to find me a bezoar?‘
‘This wants thinking about ...‘ he said.
‘What‘s that at its feet?‘ Hermione whispered.
‘So what do your oldest brothers do now they‘ve left, anyway?‘
Harry noticed at once that Snape was limping.
‘Anyone sitting there?‘ he asked, pointing at the seat opposite Harry.
‘This ball‘s called the Quaffle,‘ said Wood.
It was hard to tell whether Ron or Hermione was angrier about this.
Suddenly, people were pointing up at Harry all over the stands.
‘I‘ll get him,‘ said Ron, grinding his teeth at Malfoy‘s back, ‘one of these days, I‘ll get him -‘
‘Then kill him, fool, and be done!‘ screeched Voldemort.
Wood? thought Harry, bewildered; was Wood a cane she was going to use on him?
There was a sudden rummaging for quills and parchment.
For the first time, a spasm of fear flitted across Quirrell‘s face.
Unfortunately, the teachers seemed to be thinking along the same lines as Hermione.
In a low whisper, Harry told them what he‘d seen.
‘What‘s the You-Know-What in vault seven hundred and thirteen?‘ Harry asked.
Every morning the ground was covered in frost.
It was as though an iron fist had clenched suddenly around Harry‘s heart.
He sat down next to Harry, took one look at him and burst into tears.
I walked back to the bazaar and sat down on the steps of a closed shop.
‘So what on earth‘s Hagrid up to?‘ said Hermione.
‘Er - have the Bludgers ever killed anyone?‘ Harry asked, hoping he sounded offhand.
‘No,‘ said Harry, feeling more stupid by the minute.
Mrs Dursley sipped her tea through pursed lips.
Everyone starts at the beginning at Hogwarts, you‘ll be just fine.
‘This is the Potter boy. The quicker he leaves this Forest, the better.‘
The white king took off his crown and threw it at Harry‘s feet.
Harry jumped, he had almost forgotten that the Dursleys were there.
‘Every year she makes us a jumper,‘ said Ron, unwrapping his own, ‘and mine‘s always maroon.‘
‘Give that here, Malfoy,‘ said Harry quietly.
‘Oh yes, everyone‘s celebrating, all right,‘ she said impatiently.
‘Professor McGonagall told me all about the special circumstances, Potter. And what model is it?‘
‘Five points from Gryffindor, Weasley, and be grateful it isn‘t more. Move along, all of you.‘
‘Hurry up, boy!‘ shouted Uncle Vernon from the kitchen.
In one night, they‘d ruined any chance Gryffindor had had for the House Cup.
The Journey from Platform Nine and Three-Quarters 77
Malfoy certainly did talk about flying a lot.
One plain pointed hat (black) for day wear
‘Don‘t mess me about, Peeves, now where did they go?‘
Harry went to bed with his head buzzing with the same question.
He‘d be able to read as long as he liked, as long as it took to find out who Flamel was.
‘Can you hear something?‘ Ron whispered.
‘Be that as it may, fighting is against Hogwarts rules, Hagrid,‘ said Snape silkily.
They were standing with their backs to it, getting warm, when Snape crossed the yard.
Excitement flooded through him as he stood there in the dark and silence.
‘Do you think they‘ll attack us if we cross the room?‘ said Ron.
Next moment, thirty or forty letters came pelting out of the fireplace like bullets.
It felt as though he was sitting on some sort of plant.
‘There‘s only enough there for one of us,‘ he said.
For some reason, the sight of the cat seemed to amuse him.
‘Never mind that - pig snout, pig snout,‘ panted Harry, and the portrait swung forward.
The boat Uncle Vernon had hired was still there, with a lot of water in the bottom after the storm.
In fact, Harry had the most peculiar feeling that only he and Hagrid could see it.
‘Thanks, Harry ... I think I‘ll go to bed ... D‘you want the card, you collect them, don‘t you?‘
‘Hagrid‘s always wanted a dragon, he told me so the first time I ever met him,‘ said Harry.
This was the first night he hadn‘t been upset by it.
Something fluid and silvery grey went slithering to the floor, where it lay in gleaming folds.
‘D‘yeh think yer parents didn‘t leave yeh anything?‘
‘This isn‘t safe - she might have gone for Lilch, I bet she heard us. Come on.‘
Before he could mention this, Hagrid had steered him inside.
‘Dumbledore?‘ he said, dashing to the door to make sure.
It was a cutting from the Daily Prophet:
Harry wondered if Hagrid had changed the subject on purpose.
There was a five-rupee note between his fingers.
‘Shhhh!‘ Hagrid looked around quickly to see if anyone was listening.
He and Ron took off their jackets and pulled on their long black robes.
‘But in, you know, the Muggle world, people just stay put in photos.‘
Instead he said, as casually as he could, ‘Their son - he‘d be about Dudley‘s age now, wouldn‘t he?‘
It will make no difference, I trust, to our friendship.
But Uncle Vernon wasn‘t going to give in without a fight.
A horrible thought struck Harry, as horrible thoughts always do when you‘re very nervous.
But on the edge of town, drills were driven out of his mind by something else.
He heard hooves behind him, galloping, and something jumped clean over him, charging at the figure.
A scarlet steam engine was waiting next to a platform packed with people.
The Journey from Platform Nine and Three-Quarters 75
‘Hagrid,‘ he said quietly, ‘I think you must have made a mistake. I don‘t think 1 can be a wizard.‘
Harry stood rooted to the spot as Filch and Snape came around the corner ahead.
He pulled the Cloak over his head and his reflection vanished completely.
One pair of protective gloves (dragon hide or similar)
‘Malfoy‘s got my Remembrall, Professor.‘
‘Library books are not to be taken outside the school,‘ said Snape.
‘What would I get if I added powdered root of asphodel to an infusion of wormwood?‘
‘Oy, pea-brain!‘ yelled Ron from the other side of the chamber, and he threw a metal pipe at it.
Then he shouted, ‘There‘s another one! Mr H. Potter, The Smallest Bedroom, 4 Privet Drive -
‘... d-don‘t know why you wanted t-t-to meet here of all p- places, Severus ...‘
They edged along the walls, keeping their eyes on the doors at either end of the room.
‘Bless him, look, he knows his mummy!‘ said Hagrid.
He tapped the wall three times with the point of his umbrella.
‘Have you found out how to get past that beast of Hagrid‘s yet?‘
Professor McGonagall rolled up her scroll and took the Sorting Hat away.
He found a pair under his bed and, after pulling a spider off one of them, put them on.
‘I‘ve never seen Snape look so mean,‘ he told Hermione.
Then she walked up and down the line of bottles, muttering to herself and pointing at them.
‘You‘re worth twelve of Malfoy,‘ Harry said.
It was a tiny place, empty except for a single spindly chair which Hagrid sat on to wait.
Harry took a deep breath and picked up the smallest bottle.
I congratulated myself on having returned the money.
‘Oh, let‘s kick her, just this once,‘ Ron whispered in Harry‘s ear, but Harry shook his head.
Uncle Vernon nearly crashed into the car in front.
‘You do it, then, if you‘re so clever,‘ Ron snarled.
“Today, I'll teach you to write a little more than your name,” he said.
Peeling gold letters over the door read Ollivanders: Makers of Fine Wands since 382 BC.
Harry would have screamed, but he couldn‘t make a sound.
‘I don‘t understand ... is the Stone inside the Mirror? Should I break it?‘
‘It was not a mistake,‘ said Harry angrily.
‘It‘ll all be over at midnight on Saturday,‘ said Hermione, but this didn‘t soothe Ron at all.
‘Harry!‘ Neville burst out, the moment he saw the other two.
She hadn‘t spoken to either of them since the day Harry‘s broomstick had arrived.
‘I‘ve come to bring Harry to his aunt and uncle. They‘re the only family he has left now.‘
Then, to his relief, a voice came floating in through the train‘s open door.
He also thought he had been called a Muggle, whatever that was.
The rattling cart seemed to know its own way, because Griphook wasn‘t steering.
It had grown three times in length in just a week.
‘Do you think it had anything to do with the Stone?‘
He set off, drawing the Invisibility Cloak tight around him as he walked.
No one could wait for the holidays to start.
Uncle Vernon rapped the glass smartly with his knuckles, but the snake just snoozed on.
Their mother had just taken out her handkerchief.
A crossbow and a pair of galoshes were outside the front door.
‘Good Lord,‘ said the barman, peering at Harry, ‘is this - can this be -?‘
He then sank to the floor in a dead faint.
‘You could have woken me up,‘ said Ron, crossly.
Harry felt as though the bottom had dropped out of his stomach.
It snapped at his fingers, showing pointed fangs.
‘D‘you think that was a centaur we heard earlier?‘ said Harry.
I smiled at Arun in my most appealing way.
‘I won‘t let you do it,‘ he said, hurrying to stand in front of the portrait hole.
Hagrid had obviously whittled it himself.
‘Oh, yeah?‘ said Malfoy, trying to sneer, but looking worried.
‘Well, hurry up, I can‘t breathe!‘ Harry gasped, wrestling with it as it curled around his chest.
When Malfoy had gone, Ron and Harry looked at each other.
His next present also contained sweets - a large box of Chocolate Frogs from Hermione.
He waited until Quirrell‘s footsteps had disappeared, then peered into the classroom.
‘Where did you get it, Hagrid?‘ said Ron, crouching over the fire to get a closer look at the egg.
In fact, it was nearly midnight before the cat moved at all.
It had been Harry‘s best Christmas day ever.
Reaching Snape, she crouched down, pulled out her wand and whispered a few, well chosen words.
‘And send me an owl if you find anything.‘
Dudley‘s mouth fell open in horror but Harry‘s heart gave a leap.
He cleared his throat to let them know he was there, and Dudley screamed and ran from the room.
Not for nothing, though, was Harry the youngest Seeker in a century.
‘Do you mean,‘ Harry croaked, ‘that was Vol-
‘Nothing, Neville, nothing,‘ said Harry, hurriedly putting the Cloak behind his back.
‘I‘ve just thought of something,‘ said Harry.
Ron and Hermione joined Neville, Seamus and Dean the West Ham fan up in the top row.
Friday was an important day for Harry and Ron.
‘Everyone thinks I‘m special,‘ he said at last.
‘I hate maroon,‘ Ron moaned half-heartedly as he pulled it over his head.
He merely said, “Let me have a dollar, will you?”.
Finally he said slowly, ‘So I‘ll have thirty ... thirty ...”
‘Sorry,‘ he said, ‘but have you seen a toad at all?‘
As they jostled their way through a crowd of confused Hufflepuffs, Harry suddenly grabbed Ron‘s arm.
He stayed at home and nailed up the letter-box.
Harry struggled against the ropes binding him, but they didn‘t give.
‘As I say, even if You-Know-Who has gone
The troll stopped a few feet from Hermione.
Harry had never even imagined such a strange and splendid place.
Mighta bin a dragon dealer, mightn‘ he? I never saw his face, he kept his hood up.‘
‘Do you think this mirror shows the future?‘
‘Why would you be mad to try and rob Gringotts?‘ Harry asked.
Neville‘s lips twitched in a weak smile as he unwrapped the Frog.
‘You‘re right, Harry,‘ said Hermione in a small voice.
Harry picked it up and stared at it, his heart twanging like a giant elastic band.
‘But the glass,‘ he kept saying, ‘where did the glass go?‘
Potions lessons were turning into a sort of weekly torture, Snape was so horrible to Harry.
Standing either side of the pale boy they looked like bodyguards.
Ron couldn‘t see what was exciting about a game with only one ball where no one was allowed to fly.
‘You mean he was there in the classroom with you?‘ Harry gasped.
He glared at them all as if to say, ‘Or else.‘
‘Hagrid, you live in a wooden house,‘ she said.
Harry played with chessmen Seamus Finnigan had lent him and they didn‘t trust him at all.
Harry and the Weasleys spent a happy afternoon having a furious snowball fight in the grounds.
At this moment the boat bumped gently into the harbour wall.
Hagrid picked it up and tucked it deep inside his coat.
‘You‘ve had nearly fifteen minutes, now OUT,‘ she said firmly.
Neville, the boy who kept losing his toad, sniffed once or twice.
Once the holidays had started, Ron and Harry were having too good a time to think much about Flamel.
‘He‘s got lots o‘ rats an‘ some brandy fer the journey,‘ said Hagrid in a muffled voice.
He bought Harry a hamburger and they sat down on plastic seats to eat them.
‘First o‘ September - King‘s Cross - it‘s all on yer ticket.
Ron went purple in the face; he looked like a radish with bad sunburn.
Snape, sneaking into the Forest while everyone else was at dinner - what was going on?
After all, they normally pretended she didn‘t have a sister.
Soon there was a huddle of limp black players slumped along the wall.
Harry sat and thought about this while Hagrid read his newspaper, the Daily Prophet.
As Mr Dursley drove around the corner and up the road, he watched the cat in his mirror.
And to Harry‘s horror, a voice answered, and the voice seemed to come from Quirrell himself.
He told Hagrid about the pale boy in Madam Malkin‘s.
‘Honestly, woman, call yourself our mother? Can‘t you tell I‘m George?‘
‘Just what 1 always wanted. To make a fool of myself on a broomstick in front of Malfoy.‘
The rest of the team weren‘t too calm, either.
‘No wonder Snape‘s after it! Anyone would want it.‘
The Cupboard under the Stairs 4 Privet Drive Little Whinging Surrey
Inside, just visible, was a baby boy, fast asleep.
He had seen his parents and would be seeing them again tonight.
‘Look in the Mirror and tell me what you see.‘
They reached King‘s Cross at half past ten.
Harry pressed on through the crowd until he found an empty compartment near the end of the train.
‘Norbert‘s at a tricky stage - nothin‘ I can‘t handle.
He must have had to bunny hop all the way up to Gryffindor Tower.
“You look like a wrestler yourself,” I said.
He strode over to the sofa where Dudley sat frozen with fear.
She kissed Percy on the cheek and he left.
I asked him what currency is used in Bermuda, and whether the American dollar goes at par.
Shaking, Harry moved three spaces to the left.
‘So me, Harry an‘ Hermione‘ll go one way an‘ Draco, Neville an‘ Fang‘ll go the other.
‘I must look and lie about what I see, that‘s all.‘
Hagrid seized Harry and Hermione and hoisted them off the path behind a towering oak.
It was so dark either side of them that Harry thought there must be thick trees there.
‘Ministry o‘ Magic messin‘ things up as usual,‘ Hagrid muttered, turning the page.
Harry tried to remember, left, right, right, left, middle fork, right, left, but it was impossible.
Uncle Vernon entered the kitchen as Harry was turning over the bacon.
He had been so busy getting away from the library, he hadn‘t paid attention to where he was going.
It seemed she had been wanting to say all this for years.
‘You got there? You got Hermione‘s owl?‘
He stepped forward and the white queen pounced.
Quirrell came back out from behind the Mirror and stared hungrily into it.
‘Madam Hooch told us not to move - you‘ll get us all into trouble.‘
People pushed their way towards the door and out on to a tiny, dark platform.
‘So it has been for ages past, so it is now.‘
I had never kept any friends because sometimes friends can be one’s undoing.
I‘ll show them ... it‘ll really wipe the smiles off their faces if we win.
Hagrid came striding towards them out of the dark, Fang at his heel.
‘I shall return when we are ready for you,‘ said Professor McGonagall.
‘Lucky this plant thing‘s here, really,‘ said Ron.
The books she was carrying tumbled out of her arms but she didn‘t pick them up.
‘We can‘t go in there at night - there‘s all sorts of things in there - werewolves, I heard.‘
‘Do you want me to go to the Bloody Baron?‘
It was a mark of how bad the last week had been that the other two agreed with him.
Harry went back to the library, where Hermione was testing Ron on Astronomy.
It wasn‘t ordinary fire either; it was purple.
‘I‘ve decided to call him Norbert,‘ said Hagrid, looking at the dragon with misty eyes.
‘Oh,‘ said the boy, ‘I‘ve heard of him. He‘s a sort of servant, isn‘t he?‘
‘C‘mon, follow me - any more first-years? Mind yer step, now! first-years follow me!‘
Quietly as possible, they crept along the next corridor after Snape‘s fading footsteps.
‘You shouldn‘t be inside on a day like this,‘ he said, with an odd, twisted smile.
‘Ah, yes,‘ he said softly, ‘Harry Potter. Our new - celebrity.‘
Uncle Vernon was pointing at what looked like a large rock way out to sea.
‘I have strength enough ... for this ...‘
Icy sea spray and rain crept down their necks and a chilly wind whipped their faces.
Mr Dursley always sat with his back to the window in his office on the ninth floor.
‘The library?‘ said Hagrid, following them out of the Hall.
‘He‘s not serious?‘ he muttered to Percy.
He was about to go back upstairs when Uncle Vernon actually spoke.
‘I - I‘ve won the House Cup for Gryffindor.‘
Fortunately,umbledore arrived moments later.
‘A magic beyond all we do here! And now, bedtime. Off you trot!‘
Uncle Vernon waited until Piers was safely out of the house before starting on Harry.
‘You want to watch out for Peeves,‘ said Percy, as they set off again.
‘Mars is bright tonight,‘ Ronan repeated while Hagrid watched him impatiently.
All three of the dog‘s noses sniffed madly in their direction, even though it couldn‘t see them.
Ron, at the next table, wasn‘t having much more luck.
Potter, The Floor, Hut-on-the-Rock, The Sea.
She took a long drink from the round bottle at the end and shuddered.
Strict and clever, she gave them a talking-to the moment they had sat down in her first class.
‘Oh, are you doing magic? Let‘s see it, then.‘
Percy Weasley stuck his head through the door, looking disapproving.
Harry, Ron and Hermione sat together next to a window.
How long he stood there, he didn‘t know.
We‘re gonna try an‘ find the poor thing. We might have ter put it out of its misery.‘
Dumbledore took Harry in his arms and turned towards the Dursleys‘ house.
He was pale and looked as though he was about to cry.
‘Can‘t have,‘ Hagrid said, his voice shaking.
He took a step forward and Neville dropped Trevor the toad, who leapt out of sight.
Someone had obviously tried to behead him, but not done it properly.
‘She hasn‘t got much time,‘ he added quickly, ‘you know, with five of us.‘
A barn owl brought Neville a small package from his grandmother.
‘The gold ones are Galleons,‘ he explained.
‘Oooooooh!‘ he said, with an evil cackle.
Uncle Vernon tapped on the glass, but the snake didn‘t budge.
Had Harry thought that things couldn‘t have been worse? He was wrong.
For a few seconds, there was complete silence.
Wood was working the team harder than ever.
They looked around, as if hoping to see a sign pointing them in the right direction.
Harry dropped the bit of sausage he was holding.
Their peeling, faded gold letters spelled words in languages Harry couldn‘t understand.
But from that moment on, Hermione Granger became their friend.
He couldn‘t remember his parents at all.
‘Just before the holidays? Bit keen, aren‘t yeh?‘
Everyone from wizarding families talked about Quidditch constantly.
They found them and I drew them out without a crackle.
‘Potter, this is Oliver Wood. Wood - I‘ve found you a Seeker.‘
‘What did you say?‘ his aunt snapped through the door.
Next second, Quirrell came hurrying out of the classroom, straightening his turban.
He was being made a cup of strong tea back in Hagrid‘s hut, with Ron and Hermione.
‘So - after that obvious and disgusting bit of cheating - ‘
Please leave your luggage on the train, it will be taken to the school separately.
I think he knew I made a little this way but he didn’t mind.
A boy with dreadlocks was surrounded by a small crowd.
‘Fifty?‘ Harry gasped - they would lose the lead, the lead he‘d won in the last Quidditch match.
‘You may ask me one more thing, however.‘
‘He‘s a genius! Best wizard in the world! But he is a bit mad, yes. Potatoes, Harry?‘
At times, he even wondered whether Snape was following him, trying to catch him on his own.
‘We won‘t practise with the Snitch yet,‘ said Wood, carefully shutting it back inside the crate.
Professor Dumbledore enjoys chamber music and tenpin bowling.
He walked forward and shook the centaur‘s hand.
Malfoy had been even more unpleasant than usual since the Quidditch match.
‘Some sort of test, I think. Fred said it hurts a lot, but I think he was joking.‘
Harry pulled off the Cloak and seized the letter.
The whole of Hogwarts was open to him in this Cloak.
‘We only wondered who had done the guarding, really.‘ Hermione went on.
They flitted along corridors striped with bars of moonlight from the high windows.
They had reached the portrait of the Fat Lady.
‘He received an urgent owl from the Ministry of Magic and flew off for London at once.
‘Dunno what Harry thinks he‘s doing,‘ Hagrid mumbled.
The vault that was searched had in fact been emptied earlier that same day.
Then, none of them looking at each other, they all said ‘Thanks‘, and hurried off to get plates.
A white pawn had moved forward two squares.
Everywhere Harry went, people pointed and didn‘t trouble to lower their voices as they insulted him.
Several boys of about Harry‘s age had their noses pressed against a window with broomsticks in it.
‘Oh, I thought we‘d keep this private,‘ said Snape, his voice icy.
‘Well, Harry, you take the place of that bishop, and Hermione, you go there instead of that castle.‘
‘Yes, him - Quirrell said he hates me because he hated my father. Is that true?‘
All students should have a copy of each of the following:
‘You‘re only holding the Quidditch Cup, what‘s interesting about that? I want to see my parents.‘
‘Well, it‘s true,‘ Harry chortled as they reached the top of the marble staircase.
Harry had only just raised his wand when they heard someone speak - and it wasn‘t Malfoy.
He passed a round-faced boy who was saying, ‘Gran, I‘ve lost my toad again.‘
He was about twenty, a tall, lean fellow, and he looked kind and simple enough for my purpose.
Gloom seemed to be settling on him again.
‘How did you get here?‘ Harry asked, looking around for another boat.
Potter? Only I got about an ‘undred of these at the front desk.‘
It was also very hard to remember where anything was, because it all seemed to move around a lot.
Harry ran upstairs to their dark dormitory.
Enter, stranger, but take heed Of what awaits the sin of greed,
He pushed the door ajar and peered inside - and a horrible scene met his eyes.
This was part of his and Wood‘s game plan.
It was really lucky that Harry now had Hermione as a friend.
‘Mrs Norris?‘ breathed Ron, squinting through the dark.
‘Nothing - just black - there‘s no way of climbing down, we‘ll just have to drop.‘
He was starting to get a prickle of fear every time You-Know-Who was mentioned.
After dinner the three of them sat nervously apart in the common room.
Harry piled his plate with a bit of everything except the humbugs and began to eat.
Ahead, Harry could see the lighted windows of Hagrid‘s hut.
If Hagrid hadn‘t pointed it out, Harry wouldn‘t have noticed it was there.
‘Very safe, as they‘re both dentists,‘ said Hermione.
‘Doris Crockford, Mr Potter, can‘t believe I‘m meeting you at last.‘
‘We just want to know who Nicolas Flamel is, that‘s all,‘ said Hermione.
They stepped over the threshold and immediately a fire sprang up behind them in the doorway.
Soon the hut was full of the sound and smell of sizzling sausage.
The clanging and crashing were enough to wake the whole castle.
‘DUDLEY! MR DURSLEY! COME AND LOOK AT THIS SNAKE! YOU WON‘T BELIEVE WHAT IT‘S DOING!‘
There was a crash behind them and Uncle Vernon came skidding into the room.
Dudley had always taken anything that Harry really wanted, even if it made him sick.
‘Never,‘ said Hagrid irritably, ‘try an‘ get a straight answer out of a centaur.
He clapped his hands once and the ropes binding Harry fell off.
For some reason, the back of his neck prickled.
He chuckled and muttered, ‘I should have known.‘
I found it difficult to face him in the harsh light of day.
Malfoy, Crabbe and Goyle pushed roughly past the tree, scattering needles everywhere and smirking.
I sat up on the floor, my blanket wrapped round me, considering the situation.
There‘s nothing hidden in your head The Sorting Hat can‘t see,
‘Well, there you are,‘ Harry said quietly.
As Harry stepped forward, whispers suddenly broke out like little hissing fires all over the hall.
Madam Hooch gave a loud blast on her silver whistle.
The mountains around the school became icy grey and the lake like chilled steel.
I should go back to Arun, I told myself, if only to learn how to write.
‘Not where I‘m going, I promise you,‘ said Harry.
‘Oh, are you a Prefect, Percy?‘ said one of the twins, with an air of great surprise.
‘And you wouldn‘t tell anyone, would you? Not even one of the teachers?‘
He pulled one of them apart and said, ‘She always forgets I don‘t like corned beef.‘
Harry didn‘t miss a single one, and Wood was delighted.
‘HUFFLEPUFF!‘ shouted the hat again, and Susan scuttled off to sit next to Hannah.
Harry could see a clearing ahead, through the tangled branches of an ancient oak.
Ron knew them so well he never had trouble getting them to do what he wanted.
He sent me a note from Hamilton, Bermuda.
‘Poke him with your Smeltings stick, Dudley.‘
‘If he wants ter go, a great Muggle like you won‘t stop him,‘ growled Hagrid.
Harry supposed that the wind must have caught him in mid-jump.
He could see mountains and forests under a deep-purple sky.
Are twins once you taste them, though different at first sight.
‘And you‘re not sitting with the Prefects today, either,‘ said George.
Harry lay in his dark cupboard much later, wishing he had a watch.
Dumbledore smiled at the look of amazement on Harry‘s face.
At the foot of the first set of stairs, they spotted Mrs Norris skulking near the top.
Ron and Hermione squeezed together to give Hagrid enough space to join them.
Harry turned around - and saw, quite clearly, what.
He could hear Neville sobbing into his pillow for what seemed like hours.
Harry breathed in the funny smell that seemed to come from Quirrell‘s turban.
Harry looked back at Hagrid, smiling, and saw that Hagrid was positively beaming at him.
Not interested in anythin‘ closer‘n the moon.‘
Thief, you have been warned, beware Of finding more than treasure there.
When they had left the shop, he said, ‘Hagrid, what‘s Quidditch?‘
‘And what if I wave my wand and nothing happens?‘
‘I‘m disgusted,‘ said Professor McGonagall.
‘So what happened to you two?‘ said Harry.
‘CAR CRASH!‘ roared Hagrid, jumping up so angrily that the Dursleys scuttled back to their corner.
Harry, who was measuring out powdered spine of lion- fish, ignored them.
It stuck up at the back, just like Harry‘s did.
Harry couldn‘t make out the look on his face, but he was stuttering worse than ever.
‘I want he began, but Uncle Vernon was tearing the letters into pieces before his eyes.
I didn’t want to make myself conspicuous by staying at a hotel.
‘You all right, Harry? Yer very quiet,‘ said Hagrid.
‘Not a wizard, eh? Never made things happen when you was scared, or angry?‘
Whole sentences, I knew, could one day bring me more than a hundred rupees.
The Slytherins were already there, and so were twenty broomsticks lying in neat lines on the ground.
‘Oh - well, I thought it might be one of Fred and George‘s jokes,‘ said Ron.
‘Anyone messing around in my class will leave and not come back. You have been warned.‘
‘Now, don‘t forget, it‘s Locomotor Mortis,‘ Hermione muttered as
They could hear the letters still streaming into the room, bouncing off the walls and floor.
Within seconds it was the greyish white of old porridge.
Dumbledore hummed a little and smiled at the ceiling.
The Gryffindor common room was very noisy that evening.
The Remembrall glittered in the sun as he held it up.
‘Yeh don‘ know what yeh are?‘ he said finally.
This was just an ordinary street full of ordinary people.
‘I don‘t know,‘ said Harry, realising this for the first time.
‘So?‘ said Ron, but he looked a bit uncomfortable.
He shouted at Harry for about half an hour and then told him to go and make a cup of tea.
Every time one of their men was lost, the white pieces showed no mercy.
A soft rustling and clinking seemed to be coming from up ahead.
‘See what 1 have become?‘ the face said.
He rammed it into the lock and turned - it worked.
He led them to the very edge of the Forest.
‘Could do with some of those letters now, eh?‘ he said cheerfully.
‘Yeah,‘ said Ron, ‘and lucky Harry doesn‘t lose his head in a crisis - “there‘s no wood”, honestly.‘
‘This isn‘t football, Dean,‘ Ron reminded him.
It was chipped in places and something white was glinting at the end.
‘Thirty-six,‘ he said, looking up at his mother and father.
It took almost ten minutes to get away from them all.
She had a bossy sort of voice, lots of bushy brown hair and rather large front teeth.
It was the first time Hermione had ever failed to answer a teacher‘s question.
‘Better get the Cloak,‘ Ron muttered, as Tee Jordan finally left, stretching and yawning.
‘Dunno, sort of plant thing. I suppose it‘s here to break the fall. Come on, Hermione!‘
Neville hesitated, then clambered over the back of his seat to help.
Harry knew Ron and Hermione were thinking the same as he was.
He flung back his head and stared at the sky.
‘Potter‘s been sent a broomstick, Professor,‘ said Malfoy quickly.
‘He‘s heading for the third floor,‘ Harry said, but Ron held up his hand.
‘I say, look at that man!‘ said the boy suddenly, nodding towards the front window.
‘An‘ as fer that cat, Mrs Norris, I‘d like ter introduce her to Fang some time.
‘Finished yer exams? Got time fer a drink?‘
Malfoy went to join his friends Crabbe and Goyle, looking pleased with himself.
‘He‘ll be all right,‘ said Harry, trying to convince himself.
‘The Sorting Ceremony‘s about to start.‘
”Not only did he teach me to cook but he taught me to write my name and his.
Quirrell was walking backwards at him, so that Voldemort could still see him.
He couldn‘t remember being in the car when his parents had died.
‘Hagrid,‘ said Hermione, ‘how fast do Norwegian Ridgebacks grow, exactly?‘
‘Oh, I will,‘ said Harry, and they were surprised at the grin that was spreading over his face.
‘Snape‘s always taking points off Fred and George. Can I come and meet Hagrid with you?‘
‘I was trying to find out how to curse Dudley.‘
They spent most of their free time in Hagrid‘s darkened hut, trying to reason with him.
He took me to his room and told me I could sleep in the verandah.
Gradually my eyes became accustomed to the darkness of the room.
Most of them had never seen an owl even at nighttime.
‘D‘you think he meant you to do it?‘ said Ron.
‘Stalagmite‘s got an “m” in it,‘ said Hagrid.
‘It‘s Hedwig!‘ said Harry, hurrying to let her in.
The table was almost hidden beneath all Dudley‘s birthday presents.
Then he rounded on Harry and Ron, who had been working next to Neville.
‘How did you know it was me?‘ she asked.
And there, in the centre of the High Table, in a large gold chair, sat Albus Dumbledore.
‘Percy - he‘s a Prefect, he‘d put a stop to this.‘
Harry Potter rolled over inside his blankets without waking up.
Hermione and Neville were suffering, too.
‘What are you doing?‘ moaned Ron, grey-faced.
‘Funny way to get to a wizards‘ school, the train.
He was almost twice as tall as a normal man and at least five times as wide.
Harry had never seen anything so beautiful and sad.
He was looking over at Harry as he spoke.
Harry‘s last month with the Dursleys wasn‘t fun.
‘We were -‘ Harry began, without any idea what he was going to say.
Had that been what the thieves were looking for?
Exactly what he was looking for, none of them knew.
‘Yeah, Dumbledore‘s barking, all right,‘ said Ron proudly.
‘Not if you don‘t give us away, Peeves, please.‘
‘I am resting, look, lying down and everything. Oh, go on, Madam Pomfrey ...‘
He had just raised his wand when the compartment door slid open again.
‘N-not that you n-need it, eh, P-P-Potter?‘ He laughed nervously.
‘What about what‘s-her-name, your friend - Yvonne?‘
‘Another Weasley, eh?‘ said Hagrid, glancing at Ron‘s freckles.
‘Who on earth wants to talk to you this badly?‘ Dudley asked Harry in amazement.
They walked up a flight of stone steps and crowded around the huge, oak front door.
‘Whatever house I‘m in, I hope she‘s not in it,‘ said Ron.
‘... for pure nerve and outstanding courage, I award Gryffindor house sixty points.‘
The cut had turned a nasty shade of green.
‘Like I said, yeh‘d be mad ter try an‘ rob it,‘ said Hagrid.
It wasn‘t exactly pretty; Harry thought it looked like a crumpled, black umbrella.
Harry was wondering what a wizard did once he‘d finished school.
Uncle Vernon said sharply, ‘Don‘t touch anything he gives you, Dudley.‘
It lumbered around, blinking stupidly, to see what had made the noise.
‘Out of the way, you,‘ he said, punching Harry in the ribs.
Harry thought she was probably right, but he wasn‘t going to tell her that.
‘So you must know loads of magic already.‘
‘Give him five Knuts,‘ said Hagrid sleepily.
He couldn‘t ever remember feeling happier.
‘I‘d take you on any time on my own,‘ said Malfoy.
You might belong in Hufflepuff Where they are just and loyal,
‘I spent half me life chasin‘ yer twin brothers away from the Forest.
‘Don‘t ask me, they‘re supposed to be really stupid,‘ said Ron.
‘No one. It was addressed to you by mistake,‘ said Uncle Vernon shortly.
‘I needn‘t have learnt about the 1637 Werewolf Code of Conduct or the uprising of Elfric the Eager.‘
‘Let me speak to him ... face to face ...‘
So he knew The feeling suddenly surged back into Harry‘s legs.
HOGWARTS SCHOOL OF WITCHCRAFT AND WIZARDRY
Snape was still ignoring Hermione‘s quivering hand.
Trouble is, they mustn‘t be seen carrying an illegal dragon.
After what McGonagall and Snape have said? You‘ll be expelled!‘
‘Three Chasers,‘ Harry repeated, as Wood took out a bright red ball about the size of a football.
I got wet and a cold wind brought the rain whipping across my face.
Harry watched Snape for a while but Snape didn‘t look at him again.
‘What‘s your Quidditch team?‘ Ron asked.
He‘d never been inside the stadium before.
They stared at each other, seeming to have forgotten that Harry and Dudley were still in the room.
Dumbledore‘s silver hair was the only thing in the whole Hall that shone as brightly as the ghosts.
‘And what are Slytherin and Hufflepuff?‘
‘Idiot boy!‘ snarled Snape, clearing the spilled potion away with one wave of his wand.
It waggled its long ears, making up its tiny mind, then slouched slowly into the room.
‘No Crabbe and Goyle up here to save your neck, Malfoy,‘ Harry called.
Filch was already there - and so was Malfoy.
Uncle Vernon certainly seemed to have got back his courage.
A huge banner showing the Slytherin serpent covered the wall behind the High Table.
Back in the changing room, Wood had taken Harry aside.
‘We‘ll send you a Hogwarts toilet seat.‘
‘I bet I‘m in Hufflepuff,‘ said Harry gloomily.
The door of the compartment slid open and the youngest redheaded boy came in.
Hagrid had Norbert packed and ready in a large crate.
Hermione turned and walked straight through the purple fire.
‘I want to hear you‘re training hard, Potter, or I may change my mind about punishing you.‘
Hagrid helped Harry pile some of it into a bag.
He suspected he wouldn‘t have lost so badly if Percy hadn‘t tried to help him so much.
‘And what do you mean, you‘re my second?‘
‘If you want to go back, I won‘t blame you,‘ he said.
‘You‘ve got some nerve -‘ said Ron loudly.
Percy directed the girls through one door to their dormitory and the boys through another.
‘I suppose you and your brothers have to save up, twig by twig.‘
Griphook whistled and a small cart came hurtling up the tracks towards them.
Harry tried to understand this but it made his head pound, so he stopped.
‘Bless my soul,‘ whispered the old barman.
Hermione had managed to get to her feet at last.
‘I think Hermione does, though, why don‘t you try her?‘
‘Could a werewolf be killing the unicorns?‘ Harry asked.
Professor McGonagall‘s voice trembled as she went on.
‘Can I have a frog? I might get Agrippa - thanks -‘
Hagrid wiped his nose on the back of his hand and said, ‘That reminds me. I‘ve got yeh a present.‘
She pushed the book towards them, and Harry and Ron read:
Ron, however, was to be working with Hermione Granger.
‘Yeah - so yeh‘d be mad ter try an‘ rob it, I‘ll tell yeh that.
Dotted here and there among the students, the ghosts shone misty silver.
I hardly realised it till  it was all over.
‘Vol- sorry - You-Know-Who was at Hogwarts?‘
Harry left, before Snape could take any more points from Gryffindor.
This didn‘t have quite the effect she‘d expected.
I said, “Let's take a taxi to the club.”.
He made his way down to the staff room and knocked.
Hermione had managed to free herself before the plant got a firm grip on her.
One among us seven will let you move ahead,
One morning in mid-December, Hogwarts woke to find itself covered in several feet of snow.
Hermione looked convinced, but Ron didn‘t.
‘Have a good term,‘ said Uncle Vernon with an even nastier smile.
‘What about that tea then, eh?‘ he said, rubbing his hands together.
Harry wished he could forget what he‘d seen in the Mirror as easily but he couldn‘t.
He slipped out of bed and wrapped the Cloak around himself.
She wrenched open doors and marched along corridors with Harry trotting miserably behind her.
‘Exactly,‘ said Dumbledore, looking very seriously over the top of his half-moon glasses.
‘Third - to Mr Harry Potter ...‘ said Dumbledore.
Harry turned this news over in his mind.
The smiling face of Albus Dumbledore swam into view above him.
He was starting to feel definitely sick now.
‘All right, dear, well, have a good term - send me an owl when you get there.‘
What would happen when the rest of Gryffindor found out what they‘d done?
‘What sort of magic do you teach, Professor Quirrell?‘
They passed different groups of people hurrying in different directions.
He pulled a map of Jupiter towards him and started to learn the names of its moons.
Bright blue flames shot from her wand on to the hem of Snape‘s robes.
I have simply added him to the list of men who owe me a dollar and who have forgotten it.
‘Blimey, Harry, I keep forgettin‘ how little yeh know - not knowin‘ about Quidditch!‘
He needed a dollar in change to pay his taxi, and I lent it to him.
The train slowed right down and finally stopped.
Whether we be old and bald Or young with scabby knees,
‘Got to have that ruddy tail removed before he goes to Smeltings.‘
It roared again and started towards Ron, who was nearest and had no way to escape.
‘My scar keeps hurting - it‘s happened before, but never as often as this.‘
Please note that all pupils‘ clothes should carry name tags
For a split second, he thought he was going to fall.
‘Ever seen a game of Quidditch, Potter?‘ he asked excitedly.
The very dust and silence in here seemed to tingle with some secret magic.
There‘s blood all over the place, it must‘ve bin staggerin‘ around since last night at least.‘
A few vagrants lay beside me, rolled up tight in thin blankets.
Hermione, who came back the day before term started, took a different view of things.
Ron let go of the front of Malfoy‘s robes.
‘Come on, get it on, they‘re lovely and warm.‘
In an hour‘s time he‘d be walking on to the pitch.
Madam Pomfrey came over at that moment and made them leave, saying Ron needed sleep.
The Dursleys couldn‘t have known about this or they‘d have had it from him faster than blinking.
Students may also bring an owl OR a cat OR a toad
‘I think he‘s been knocked out,‘ Ron said to Harry.
He came back a minute later with a pile of books in his arms and slammed them down on the table.
‘Very nice,‘ said Wood, his eyes glinting.
‘But will it cover all three of us?‘ said Ron.
Uncle Vernon made another funny noise, like a mouse being trodden on.
Experts are unable to explain why the owls have suddenly changed their sleeping pattern.
‘No, not the floor. It was standing on a trapdoor. It‘s obviously guarding something.‘
Don‘ reckon they could‘ve done if he was cornin‘ back.
‘No,‘ said Harry flatly, ‘we‘ve done enough poking around.‘
The Dursleys ducked, but Harry leapt into the air trying to catch one - ' ‘Out! OUT!‘
Mr Dursley, however, had a perfectly normal, owl-free morning.
‘Well, you can‘t expect him to hang around all day.‘ said Ron.
‘Why? Blimey, Harry, everyone‘d be wantin‘ magic solutions to their problems.
‘Couldn‘t make us a cup o‘ tea, could yeh? It‘s not been an easy journey ...‘
‘But that means he and his wife will die, won‘t they?‘
‘Welcome,‘ said Hagrid, ‘to Diagon Alley.‘
‘Spells - enchantments,‘ said Hagrid, unfolding his newspaper as he spoke.
‘My dear Professor, I‘ve never seen a cat sit so stiffly.‘
‘Are we allowed to speak yet?‘ said Ron grumpily.
He had only just realised how hungry he was.
Then he came back and sat down as though this was as normal as talking on the telephone.
‘Fancy seeing you here, Professor McGonagall.‘
She, too, was wearing a cloak, an emerald one.
‘I couldn‘t help overhearing what you and Malfoy were saying -‘
‘Good afternoon, Harry,‘ said Dumbledore.
Harry had a thin face, knobbly knees, black hair and bright-green eyes.
I had earlier called myself Ranbir, Sudhir, Trilok and Surinder.
‘Oh, Mum, can I go on the train and see him, Mum, oh please ...‘
Mr Ollivander had come so close that he and Harry were almost nose to nose.
Harry couldn‘t speak, but Hagrid understood.
‘Where‘re you going?‘ said Ron sleepily.
‘Voldemort had powers I will never have.‘
‘Wood‘s captain of the Gryffindor team,‘ Professor McGonagall explained.
Then a noise in the next room made them jump.
Harry noticed he gripped his pink umbrella very tightly as he spoke.
‘If that‘s what I think it is - they‘re really rare, and really valuable.‘
‘Got it,‘ said Hagrid at last, holding up a tiny golden key.
FLUME With a funny, muffled sort of thump he landed on something soft.
‘Pretend to break your leg,‘ Hermione suggested.
‘That‘s really nice of her,‘ said Harry, trying the fudge, which was very tasty.
‘I hate them both,‘ said Harry, ‘Malfoy and Snape.‘
‘Nah - can‘t spell it. All right - Voldemort.‘ Hagrid shuddered.
Someone knocked into Harry as they hurried past him.
Not all at once, but in reasonable numbers, and as far as can be, in alphabetical order.
He took a deep breath, covered his face with his arms and sprinted across the room.
This hat was patched and frayed and extremely dirty.
Suddenly, in a clearing ahead, something definitely moved.
‘Didn‘t even scratch himself. Charlie Weasley couldn‘t have done it.‘
Harry looked over her shoulder to read it:
Madam Pince the librarian brandished a feather duster at him.
Who cared what the threeheaded dog was guarding? What did it matter if Snape stole it, really?
‘Severus?‘ Quirrell laughed and it wasn‘t his usual quivering treble, either, but cold and sharp.
‘Oh, I see - so you‘ve never been to Brazil?‘
Madam Hooch spoke angrily to Flint and then ordered a free shot at the goalposts for Gryffindor.
‘... Yes - look! Broomsticks! We‘ve got to catch the key to the door!‘
Who had sent the Cloak? Had it really once belonged to his father?
He strode off in the direction of the staff room.
Trying to pull himself together, he let himself into the house.
‘Bulstrode, Millicent‘ then became a Slytherin.
‘P for prefect! Get it on, Percy, come on, we‘re all wearing ours, even Harry got one.‘
He reached out a hand to stroke the dragon‘s head.
Although this was an improvement in many ways, it did become a bit depressing after a while.
‘Stand back,‘ said Griphook importantly.
Like Harry, she felt they deserved what they‘d got.
Harry didn‘t know whether to laugh or not.
No one, ever, in his whole life, had written to him.
Harry, who was still playing the flute, waved at Ron to get his attention and pointed at himself.
‘Owls ... shooting stars ... and there were a lot of funny-looking people in town today ...‘
One thing was certain, there was no television in there.
He stole downstairs without turning on any of the lights.
Harry bolted to the door and looked out.
‘It‘ll be gone by next Tuesday,‘ said Ron.
‘That‘s mine!‘ said Harry, trying to snatch it back.
Every year, Harry was left behind with Mrs Figg, a mad old lady who lived two streets away.
‘But what are you going to do with it when it‘s hatched?‘ said Hermione.
He shook his head and then, to Harry‘s relief, spotted Hagrid.
‘Absolutely,‘ said Professor McGonagall crisply.
Ron tore his eyes away from this splendid sight to look excitedly at Harry.
He stopped a passing guard, but didn‘t dare mention platform nine and three-quarters.
At the same instant, black flames shot up in the doorway leading onwards.
They didn‘t think they could bear it if anyone found out about the Potters.
‘This is it!‘ Ron moaned, as they pushed helplessly at the door.
‘My brothers told me about you - you‘re Nearly Headless Nick!‘
Harry was turning over the wizard coins and looking at them.
‘You are here to learn the subtle science and exact art of potionmaking,‘ he began.
Harry nervously tried to flatten his hair.
They had hardly fluttered out of the way when another owl dropped a letter on top of the parcel.
Potions lessons took place down in one of the dungeons.
‘Why are you going to London?‘ Harry asked, trying to keep things friendly.
He rummaged around in his trunk and pulled out a very battered-looking wand.
Harry watched the goblin on their right weighing a pile of rubies as big as glowing coals.
‘Just yer wand left - oh yeah, an‘ I still haven‘t got yeh a birthday present.
‘Oh, we found out who he is ages ago,‘ said Ron impressively.
‘See?‘ Wood panted, forcing the struggling Bludger back into the crate and strapping it down safely.
‘Why?‘ panted Hermione, hurrying to keep up.
‘Not a soul knows except me an‘ Dumbledore,‘ said Hagrid proudly.
Hermione almost ran to the stool and jammed the hat eagerly on her head.
The white queen turned her blank face towards him.
‘If Quirrell‘s told him how to break his Anti-Dark Force spell -‘
There was nothing to stop him staying here all night with his family.
It looked as if Norbert‘s fangs were poisonous.
Snape didn‘t dislike Harry - he hated him.
After a few minutes he stammered, ‘What does it mean, they await my owl?‘
‘Here I come,‘ he said and he drained the little bottle in one gulp.
‘Give it here!‘ Harry yelled, but Malfoy had leapt on to his broomstick and taken off.
As the snake shook its head, a deafening shout behind Harry made both of them jump.
Harry had the best morning he‘d had in a long time.
None of them noticed a large tawny owl flutter past the window.
Wood was now looking as though all his dreams had come true at once.
‘So sorry, your bloodiness, Mr Baron, sir,‘ he said greasily.
He crossed the corridor and disappeared from view.
His father‘s ... this had been his father‘s.
Both of them were thickset and looked extremely mean.
One by one, the ghosts floated away through the opposite wall.
‘You flatter me,‘ said Dumbledore calmly.
‘Did you get it?‘ Ron asked as Harry joined them.
He could see the High Table properly now.
Harry shook his head violently to shut Neville up, but Professor McGonagall had seen.
The baby dragon flopped on to the table.
Neither dwarf nor giant holds death in their insides;
Mr Dursley gave himself a little shake and put the cat out of his mind.
Harry nodded, but stopped quickly, because it made his head hurt.
‘You had it to yourself all last night, give me a bit more time.‘
Harry‘s broom jumped into his hand at once, but it was one of the few that did.
But he hadn‘t walked five paces before a high voice spoke, though Quirrell wasn‘t moving his lips.
Hedwig hadn‘t brought Harry anything so far.
Harry seriously doubted this, but thought it best not to argue.
We received your message and enclose your Christmas present.
‘Dunno, but I hope it‘s really hurting him,‘ said Ron bitterly.
‘We, if either of you do see anythin‘, let me know, won‘t yeh? We‘ll be off, then.
Now they were facing a second pair of doors, silver this time, with words engraved upon them:
They crammed their pockets with the last of the sweets and joined the crowd thronging the corridor.
1 set glass or crystal phials 1 telescope 1 set brass scales
Harry had also forgotten that Malfoy had got a detention, too.
‘I‘d not say no ter summat stronger if yeh‘ve got it, mind.‘
‘So yeh haven‘t noticed anythin‘ strange?‘
Hermione ignored him and spoke to Harry.
So if you seek beneath our floors A treasure that was never yours,
‘Taking Dudley to hospital,‘ growled Uncle Vernon.
‘Can‘t tell yeh that,‘ said Hagrid mysteriously.
Harry had difficulty hiding his glee as he handed the note to Ron to read.
Warlock, Supreme Mugwump, International Confed.
Harry, on the other hand, was going to Stonewall High, the local comprehensive.
They didn‘t meet anyone else until they reached the staircase up to the third floor.
‘Can we buy all this in London?‘ Flarry wondered aloud.
It was the unicorn all right, and it was dead.
Harry sat up and gasped; the glass front of the boa constrictor‘s tank had vanished.
Harry saw that Hagrid looked very worried.
‘And there‘s Aunt Petunia knocking on the door,‘ Harry thought, his heart sinking.
They heard the click of the letter-box and flop of letters on the doormat.
But I knew that none of these emotions would show on Arun’s face when he discovered the theft.
‘Writin‘ lines! What good‘s that ter anyone? Yeh‘ll do summat useful or yeh‘ll get out.
‘Hurry up!‘ their mother said, and the three boys clambered on to the train.
‘There are all kinds of courage,‘ said Dumbledore, smiling.
‘What‘ve you done to him?‘ Harry whispered.
‘Just the one. Gringotts. Run by goblins.‘
‘I had a dream about a motorbike,‘ said Harry, remembering suddenly.
It towered over them as they sailed nearer and nearer to the cliff on which it stood.
‘I just wondered if I could have my book back.‘
They scrambled into the common room and collapsed, trembling into armchairs.
‘If yeh know where to go,‘ said Flagrid.
‘Stay on the path, I‘ll come back for yeh!‘
‘In the car crash when your parents died,‘ she had said.
At every turn Harry expected to run into Filch or Mrs Norris, but they were lucky.
Percy nearly broke his teeth on a silver Sickle embedded in his slice.
‘That is because it is a monstrous thing, to slay a unicorn,‘ said Firenze.
‘Welcome to Hogwarts,‘ said Professor McGonagall.
He pulled out the Cloak and then his eyes fell on the flute Hagrid had given him for Christmas.
He had been wondering for a while if Flamel wasn‘t somewhere in there.
‘You can keep it,‘ said Harry, laughing at how pleased Ron was.
‘You‘d be stiff if you‘d been sitting on a brick wall all day‘ said Professor McGonagall.
The people hurrying by didn‘t glance at it.
Neville‘s legs sprang apart and he got to his feet, trembling.
It was a few seconds before Mr Dursley realised that the man was wearing a violet cloak.
Harry tried to shut the door quietly, but -
He sat up and felt around, his eyes not used to the gloom.
‘I‘m up front, the Prefects have got two compartments to themselves -‘
He looked around anxiously and saw that everyone else looked terrified too.
Hermione, however, had more on her mind than the Philosopher‘s Stone.
I was really grateful to Arun for teaching me to write.
‘Tokens from your friends and admirers,‘ said Dumbledore, beaming.
He pulled the ticket Hagrid had given him out of his pocket.
When I drew Arun into conversation, he didn’t seem to realise I was a stranger.
He was sleeping peacefully with a soft and easy breathing.
What was going on? The turban fell away.
The Dursleys shuddered to think what the neighbours would say if the Potters arrived in the street.
‘Harry‘s is better than ours, though,‘ said Fred, holding up Harry‘s jumper.
‘The Great Humberto‘s on tonight. I want to stay somewhere with a television.‘
‘It must wake up the moment you stop playing,‘ said Harry.
‘Longbottom, if brains were gold you‘d be poorer than Weasley, and that‘s saying something.‘
‘Well, of course, that was the Headmaster, quite different. You need rest.‘
‘These birds ... they can‘t be here just for decoration,‘ said Hermione.
Second, different are those who stand at either end,
At last, Hagrid managed to make himself heard over the babble.
They ate stale cornflakes and cold tinned tomatoes on toast for breakfast next day.
It was the first really fine day they‘d had in months.
‘I know ... I know ...‘ he said heavily.
‘You will keep looking while I‘m away, won‘t you?‘ said Hermione.
The oldest boy came striding into sight.
Hagrid sidled through the door as he spoke.
‘How to get on to the platform?‘ she said kindly, and Harry nodded
Hermione was stomping up the stairs looking disapprovingly at the package in Harry‘s hand.
‘Now, you listen here, boy,‘ he snarled.
Harry clambered on to his Nimbus Two Thousand.
Dumbledore, however, was choosing another sherbet lemon and did not answer.
His whole head swung off his neck and fell on to his shoulder as if it was on a hinge.
What looked like the oldest boy marched towards platforms nine and ten.
‘It‘s the best place for him,‘ said Dumbledore firmly.
Snape was holding his robes above his knees.
An‘ this is Ronan, you two. He‘s a centaur.‘
There was a suit of armour near the kitchens, he knew, but he must be five floors above there.
‘Thanks for the fudge and the jumper, Mrs Weasley.‘
‘The Forest?‘ he repeated, and he didn‘t sound quite as cool as usual.
‘ The news reader allowed himself a grin. ‘Most mysterious.
‘No,‘ Harry said again, wondering what on earth Quidditch could be.
‘Why isn‘t he down in the dungeons with the rest of the teachers?‘
‘I think,‘ said Ron, ‘we‘re going to have to be chessmen.‘
He closed his eyes, stepped in front of the Mirror and opened them again.
‘Midnight on Saturday!‘ he said in a hoarse voice.
Harry and Ron wouldn‘t have minded, but she kept nagging them to do the same.
‘And we know what that dog‘s guarding, it‘s a Philosopher‘s St-‘
‘Hermione, how many times in our lives are we going to see a dragon hatching?‘
‘But it‘s that sad - knew yer mum an‘ dad, an‘ nicer people yeh couldn‘t find - anyway -
‘Seems a shame ter row, though,‘ said Hagrid, giving Harry another of his sideways looks.
He‘d be packing his bags in ten minutes.
‘At last. And where did you get that motorbike?‘
At last, the puddings too disappeared and Professor Dumbledore got to his feet again.
‘Harry Potter, not a wizard - you wait, you‘ll be right famous at Hogwarts.‘
‘He remembers!‘ cried Dedalus Diggle, looking around at everyone.
‘Daddy‘s gone mad, hasn‘t he?‘ Dudley asked Aunt Petunia dully late that afternoon.
In the very heart of the fire, underneath the kettle, was a huge, black egg.
Draco Malfoy and his friends Crabbe and Goyle sniggered behind their hands.
And then, once you had managed to find them, there were the lessons themselves.
‘Yes, please,‘ said Ron, but Harry cut across him.
Harry could see himself reflected in those misty eyes.
I hesitated long enough for the train to leave without me.
He showed Harry two identical balls, jet black and slightly smaller than the red Quaffle.
With the twins‘ help, Harry‘s trunk was at last tucked away in a corner of the compartment.
They moved silently wherever he sent them.
Hagrid yawned loudly sat up and stretched.
‘Of course not,‘ said Harry, eager to see more magic.
‘Hope to see you in Hufflepuff!‘ said the Friar.
He wasn‘t sure he liked Mr Ollivander too much.
‘Is that where -?‘ whispered Professor McGonagall.
‘I suppose so,‘ said Mrs Dursley stiffly.
For a moment it looked as though she might faint.
‘This is where I leave you,‘ Firenze murmured as Hagrid hurried off to examine the unicorn.
But if you would move onwards, neither is your friend;
‘Yeah,‘ said Hagrid, ‘but have yeh seen anythin‘, Ronan? Anythin‘ unusual?‘
‘What have we got today?‘ Harry asked Ron as he poured sugar on his porridge.
Harry‘s heart rose; if they were going to be working with Hagrid it wouldn‘t be so bad.
My dollar has clean gone out of his mind.
‘I mean, they‘re famous. You‘re famous.‘
‘I see myself shaking hands with Dumbledore,‘ he invented.
‘It‘s not poison?‘ said Harry anxiously.
On the contrary, he sat bolt upright and broke into a sweat.
‘They didn‘ keep their gold in the house, boy! Nah, first stop fer us is Gringotts.
The snake jerked its head towards Uncle Vernon and Dudley, then raised its eyes to the ceiling.
‘It‘s nearly out.‘ He ushered them inside.
‘Harry - move diagonally four squares to the right.‘
‘We‘ve got the Invisibility Cloak,‘ said Harry.
She eyed him with a mixture of shock and suspicion.
Yet Harry Potter was still there, asleep at the moment, but not for long.
‘Only because you‘re too - well - noble to use them.‘
‘What good‘ll that do? How are we going to get any points back if we can‘t win at Quidditch?‘
‘I want to read that letter,‘ he said loudly.
But the others wouldn‘t let Professor Quirrell keep Harry to himself.
Dumbledore sighed very deeply this time.
‘First time at Hogwarts? Ron‘s new, too.‘
Whatever Professor McGonagall had expected, it wasn‘t that.
‘Have you got your own broom?‘ the boy went on.
I make no difference in my demeanour to them, but I only wish that I could forget.
It sloped steeply downwards and there were little railway tracks on the floor.
Harry saw he still had a black mark on his nose.
A rip near the brim opened wide like a mouth - and the hat began to sing:
Neville was bent double, wheezing and spluttering.
Harry strained to catch what they were saying.
They‘d left the Invisibility Cloak on top of the tower.
While he drove, Uncle Vernon complained to Aunt Petunia.
And the old man hugged Mr Dursley around the middle and walked off.
The snake jabbed its tail at a little sign next to the glass.
‘Blown up a toilet? We‘ve never blown up a toilet.‘
Snape‘s face was twisted with fury as he dropped his robes quickly to hide his leg.
‘Midnight all right? We‘ll meet you in the trophy room, that‘s always unlocked.‘
‘Oh, no,‘ said Ron, pale as the Bloody Baron.
‘Trevor!‘ cried Neville blissfully, holding out his hands.
They hurried out of the chamber and didn‘t speak at all until they had climbed two floors up.
‘You want to go first? Are you sure?‘ said Ron.
What they really needed was a nice long search without Madam Pince breathing down their necks.
‘Harry - you‘re a great wizard, you know.‘
A sudden yelp told her she had done her job.
Hagrid hadn‘t been doing his gamekeeping duties because the dragon was keeping him so busy.
A tinkling bell rang somewhere in the depths of the shop as they stepped inside.
Out on the stone steps, Harry turned to the others.
‘I think he‘s brilliant,‘ said Harry coldly.
‘Neville, you don‘t know what you‘re doing.‘
‘How could a troll get in?‘ Harry asked as they climbed the stairs.
‘You don‘t know you‘ll make a fool of yourself,‘ said Ron reasonably.
‘Never thought you‘d like fat little cry babies, Parvati.‘
Ropes sprang out of thin air and wrapped themselves tightly around Harry.
‘I‘m going to show you what the Bludgers do,‘ Wood said.
‘I‘m sayin‘ nothin‘,‘ said Hagrid flatly.
‘What did you talk to him about, Hagrid? Did you mention Hogwarts at all?‘
‘We‘ve got to close in on it!‘ Harry called, not taking his eyes off the key with the damaged wing.
He had to keep Quirrell from giving his whole attention to the Mirror.
Peeves was bobbing halfway up, loosening the carpet so that people would trip.
Harry thought Flint looked as if he had some troll blood in him.
He couldn‘t stay here, he had to find his way back to bed.
When Harry knocked they heard a frantic scrabbling from inside and several booming barks.
At last, a great crunching noise announced Hagrid‘s return.
He flicked it open, held it up in the air and clicked it.
It gave Harry a look that said quite plainly: ‘I get that all the time.‘
They climbed in - Hagrid with some difficulty - and were off.
‘Where‘s my letter?‘ said Harry, the moment Uncle Vernon had squeezed through the door.
Quirrell, however, must have been braver than they‘d thought.
He tried to start a fire but the empty crisp packets just smoked and shrivelled up.
Harry felt the blood drain out of his face.
‘Get off, Scabbers! He‘s chewing my sheets.‘
Potter Room 1 7 Railview Hotel Cokeworth
An‘ then - an‘ this is the real myst‘ry of the thing - he tried to kill you, too.
It bowed to each of the four tables and then became quite still again.
‘Abou‘ time,‘ he said. ‘I bin waitin‘ fer half an hour already. All right, Harry, Hermione?‘
Even though it was such a warm day, there was a blazing fire in the grate.
Then he said slowly, ‘It shows us what we want ... whatever we want ...‘
Harry looked down at his feet, but they had gone.
This was so unfair that Harry opened his mouth to argue, but Ron kicked him behind their cauldron.
‘A letter?‘ repeated Professor McGonagall faintly, sitting back down on the wall.
‘I have a few last-minute points to dish out. Let me see. Yes ...
Harry noticed that the other teachers‘ smiles had become rather fixed.
‘Know you‘re there, even if I can‘t see you. Are you ghoulie or ghostie or wee student beastie?‘
‘I got this out of the library weeks ago for a bit of light reading.‘
the greatest nations were built up on the rock basis of absolute honesty.
‘All right,‘ Harry mumbled, ‘I‘m getting up.‘
The sun shone brightly on a stack of cauldrons outside the nearest shop.
Gryffindor cheers nearly raised the bewitched ceiling; the stars overhead seemed to quiver.
Even worse than Peeves, if that was possible, was the caretaker, Argus Filch.
‘Maple and phoenix feather. Seven inches. Quite whippy. Try
They also carried knobbly sticks, used for hitting each other while the teachers weren‘t looking.
They walked on through the dense, dark trees.
They heard him banging things with his Smeltings stick all the way down the hall.
‘Anyway, what are you revising for, you already know it all.‘
Ron had taken out a lumpy package and unwrapped it.
He held out an enormous hand and shook Harry‘s whole arm.
‘Another year gone!‘ Dumbledore said cheerfully.
A tall, black-haired witch in emerald-green robes stood there.
‘Would you mind leaving while we change?‘
‘You all right, I lermione?‘ Hagrid whispered.
A hooded figure came swiftly down the front steps of the castle.
The dishes in front of him were now piled with food.
They were going even deeper now and gathering speed.
Hagrid was squinting up the dark path, but after a few seconds, the sound faded away.
He seemed to think he‘d said too much, because he went back to staring out of the window.
‘You want to be more careful,‘ said Snape.
The next chamber was so dark they couldn‘t see anything at all.
‘We‘ve just got to make sure we play a clean game, so Snape hasn‘t got an excuse to pick on u
Once term had started, they were back to skimming through books for ten minutes during their breaks.
‘We‘re not offended,‘ said Harry quickly.
‘Mighta come up,‘ said Hagrid, frowning as he tried to remember.
And then yeh gotta find yer way - Gringotts is hundreds of miles under London, see.
‘Shut up, Peeves - please - you‘ll get us thrown out.‘
Where should he go? He stopped, his heart racing, and thought.
‘There‘s a list there of everything yeh need.‘
Dumbledore gave a great sniff as he took a golden watch from his pocket and examined it.
‘One can never have enough socks,‘ said Dumbledore.
Hermione wasn‘t going to give up that easily.
‘Anyway, we‘ve got to go, Lee Jordan reckons he‘s found a new secret passageway out of the school.‘
She leapt up and struggled towards a damp wall.
‘Neville,‘ Ron exploded, ‘get away from that hole and don‘t be an idiot -‘
‘Could I - could I say goodbye to him, sir?‘ asked Hagrid.
Hermione rolled up the sleeves of her gown, flicked her wand and said, ‘Wingardium Leviosa!‘
‘Look in it properly go on, stand where I am.‘
Harry, Ron and Hermione shivered slightly - the towering white chessmen had no faces.
Surely that meant they‘d try again? And this time he‘d make sure they didn‘t fail.
‘Got the lot here - another young man being fitted up just now, in fact.‘
You‘re in safe hands (though I have none) For I‘m a Thinking Cap!‘
Two among our number hold only nettle wine,
WHAM - a thud and a nasty crack and Neville lay, face down, on the grass in a heap.
He was going to be expelled, he just knew it.
‘We‘ve had precious little to celebrate for eleven years.‘
He rose up in the air and floated there, squinting at them.
They had just passed a bend in the path when Hermione grabbed Hagrid‘s arm.
‘I would trust Hagrid with my life,‘ said Dumbledore.
One wild cart-ride later they stood blinking in the sunlight outside Gringotts.
The pain in Harry‘s head was so bad he fell to his knees.
‘What are you doing?‘ said a voice from the corner of the room.
They were something I had forgotten in the excitement of a hundred rupees.
Harry could see Draco Malfoy banging his goblet on the table.
‘You‘ll be for it this time, Potter, first-years aren‘t allowed them.‘
‘Thirty-nine, sweetums,‘ said Aunt Petunia.
Five minutes later, Ron and Hermione joined him, shaking their heads.
‘I‘m tellin‘ yeh, yer wrong!‘ said Hagrid hotly. ‘I don‘ know why
‘Want a hand?‘ It was one of the red-haired twins he‘d followed through the ticket box.
‘How‘s yer brother Charlie?‘ Hagrid asked Ron.
‘Happy Christmas,‘ said Ron sleepily as Harry scrambled out of bed and pulled on his dressing-gown.
Dudley and Piers wanted to see huge, poisonous cobras and thick, man-crushing pythons.
Harry, meanwhile, still had questions to ask, hundreds of them.
‘I‘m not as good as you,‘ said Harry, very embarrassed, as she let go of him.
If the motorbike was huge, it was nothing to the man sitting astride it.
He‘d lost two points for Gryffindor in his very first week - why did Snape hate him so much?
‘Go to Professor McGonagall!‘ Hermione urged Neville.
‘Comb your hair!‘ he barked, by way of a morning greeting.
‘We could phone Marge,‘ Uncle Vernon suggested.
And in the end, Hagrid agreed that they could send an owl to Charlie to ask him.
It didn‘t come ... he kept on running ... he opened his eyes.
Yesterday he‘d have given anything to be up here.
He pulled out an arrow and fitted it into his crossbow, raising it, ready to fire.
‘And we‘d better stay outside the third-floor corridor,‘ Harry told Ron.
‘School houses. There‘s four. Everyone says Hufflepuff are a lot o‘ duffers, but -‘
Dumbledore and Professor McGonagall bent forward over the bundle of blankets.
Harry made a grab for the letter but Uncle Vernon knocked his hand out of the way.
Then Hermione had performed a tricky little charm so that the paint flashed different colours.
‘The Restricted Section? Well, they can‘t be far, we‘ll catch them.‘
That evening, Dudley paraded around the living-room for the family in his brand-new uniform.
He looked very out of place in his moleskin overcoat.
One book had a dark stain on it that looked horribly like blood.
‘I think Mum‘s got a second cousin who‘s an accountant, but we never talk about him.‘
It seemed to be a silver cigarette lighter.
‘What does this mirror do? How does it work? Help me, Master!‘
Wood‘s expression changed from puzzlement to delight.
‘I know who you are!‘ said Ron suddenly.
Snape was in the middle of the stands opposite them.
The air became colder and colder as they hurtled round tight corners.
About twenty ghosts had just streamed through the back wall.
They say he always favours them - we‘ll be able to see if it‘s true.
‘What‘s this stuff?‘ were his first words.
Unfortunately, something about their guilty faces caught Snape‘s eye.
He was pale and his eyes were glittering.
Then, suddenly, Hagrid let out a howl like a wounded dog.
‘What house are your brothers in?‘ asked Harry.
Hermione was running towards them down the path, Hagrid puffing along behind her.
Harry leant back quickly so they couldn‘t see him looking.
It might even be an incentive to be honest.
‘You want to be careful with those,‘ Ron warned Harry.
He held out his hand to shake Harry‘s, but Harry didn‘t take it.
Harry looked at Ron, who was still standing with his wand in the air.
Harry, Malfoy and Fang stood transfixed.
‘It bit me!‘ he said, showing them his hand, which was wrapped in a bloody handkerchief.
The low buzz of chatter stopped when they walked in.
‘This is the best team Gryffindor‘s had in years. We‘re going to win. I know it.‘
He was tall, thin and gangling, with freckles, big hands and feet and a long nose.
‘It‘s the girls‘ toilets!‘ Harry gasped.
If Gryffindor won, they would move up into second place in the House Championship.
Tie couldn‘t stop stammering his thanks, sounding just like Professor Quirrell.
‘Come on, boy - it‘s all right, up you get.‘
They had reached a snowy-white building which towered over the other little shops.
‘You don‘t want this, it‘s all dry,‘ said Ron.
‘Yes,‘ said Harry, ‘but I can‘t remember it.‘
Cold, damp air rushed past him as he fell down, down, down and -
‘Just looking,‘ he said, and he sloped away with Crabbe and Goyle behind him.
What could he have been thinking of? It must have been a trick of the light.
People jostled them as they moved forwards towards the gateway back to the Muggle world.
The noise of the storm outside dropped a little.
‘Yeh are if yeh want ter stay at Hogwarts,‘ said Hagrid fiercely.
‘And it showed your friend Ron himself as Head Boy.‘
‘But what should we do, Vernon? Should we write back? Tell them we don‘t want -‘
Ron‘s nerves were already stretched to breaking point with anxiety about Harry.
Uncle Vernon bought him another one and Harry was allowed to finish the first.
They landed quickly and Harry ran to the door, the key struggling in his hand.
Going to be any more showers of owls tonight, Jim?‘
They stopped and so did he, just near enough to hear what they were saying.
They dropped lower and circled beneath him, obviously hoping to catch him if he fell.
Everybody finished the song at different times.
‘I know what you‘re thinking about, Harry, that mirror. Don‘t go back tonight.‘
‘How do you know about Fluffy?‘ he said.
‘I have business here, Peeves,‘ croaked Harry.
Harry and Hermione didn‘t get a chance to answer.
Harry jumped off his broom, a foot from the ground.
‘I‘d be careful if I were you, Potter,‘ he said slowly.
And the only person I knew really well in town was the person I had robbed!.
It was chalk white with glaring red eyes and slits for nostrils, like a snake.
‘You‘re not old enough, Ginny, now be quiet. All right, Percy, you go first.‘
‘Thought you wouldn‘t open a book before coming, eh, Potter?‘
‘He‘s just made that rule up,‘ Harry muttered angrily as Snape limped away.
Ron couldn‘t get worked up, it was too hot.
Chuckling about Malfoy, they waited, Norbert thrashing about in his crate.
Professor Flitwick put the class into pairs to practise.
At first they just hurtled through a maze of twisting passages.
So Harry set off into the heart of the Forest with Malfoy and Fang.
‘You don‘t understand, Professor, Harry Potter‘s coming he‘s got a dragon!‘
Malfoy seized the package from Harry and felt it.
Everyone was eating the food that had been sent up.
It had twelve hands but no numbers; instead, little planets were moving around the edge.
They‘re saying all down the train that Harry Potter‘s in this compartment.
‘I suppose you added the porcupine quills before taking the cauldron off the fire?‘
Harry and Ron were delighted when she told Malfoy he‘d been doing it wrong for years.
‘They‘re not really frogs, are they?‘ He was starting to feel that nothing would surprise him.
‘Lily and James ... I can‘t believe it ... I didn‘t want to believe it ... Oh, Albus ...‘
‘What have you been telling him?‘ growled Bane.
Malfoy let out a terrible scream and bolted - so did Fang.
‘About once every ten years,‘ said Griphook, with a rather nasty grin.
But Neville was clearly steeling himself to do something desperate.
‘Yes,‘ said Quirrell idly, walking around the Mirror to look at the back.
‘Listen here - I‘ve told yeh - drop it. It‘s nothin‘ to you what that dog‘s guardin‘.‘
Clearly not wanting to be seen, it walked as fast as possible towards the Forbidden Forest.
A loud, rude sound, like the air being let out of a balloon, answered.
Snape was sweeping about in his usual bad temper, which surely meant that the Stone was still safe.
What a feeling - he swooped in and out of the goalposts and then sped up and down the pitch.
It was holding a huge wooden club, which dragged along the floor because its arms were so long.
The light of adventure was kindling again in Ron‘s eyes, but Hermione answered before Harry could.
He expected to feel sharp beaks and claws tearing at him any second, but nothing happened.
His lessons, too, were becoming more and more interesting now that they had mastered the basics.
‘There‘s a Ministry of Magic?‘ Harry asked, before he could stop himself.
‘Not if I can help it,‘ said Hermione grimly.
They sped up a staircase to the third floor and tiptoed towards the trophy room.
Gliding silently over the castle he saw Snape enter the Forest at a run.
Half-terrified, half-furious, they acted as though any chair with Harry in it was empty.
‘Shake ‘em off ... shake ‘em off,‘ he would mutter whenever he did this.
‘I know you haven‘t,‘ said Professor McGonagall, sounding half- exasperated, half-admiring.
They didn‘t stop to eat or drink all day.
Harry gripped the edges of the stool and thought, ‘Not
‘I‘d give anything for one of these,‘ he said.
‘S-s-sorry,‘ sobbed Hagrid, taking out a large spotted handkerchief and burying his face in it.
‘Potter, come back here!‘ Quirrell shouted.
‘Three up ... two across ...‘ he muttered.
Dudley came waddling towards them as fast as he could.
‘I can‘t see anything.‘ ‘Look! Look at them all... there are loads of them ...‘
It was Professor McGonagall, carrying a large pile of books.
The toadless boy was back, but this time he had a girl with him.
She clutched her throat and made a choking noise.
There was a tabby cat standing on the corner of Privet Drive, but there wasn‘t a map in sight.
Harry followed Hagrid out on to the rock.
Ron pointed: at the end of a passage to the left, something huge was moving towards them.
It was true that Harry wasn‘t going back to Privet Drive for Christmas.
I was frightened when this happened and crawled quickly and quietly out of the room.
It was Ginny Weasley, Ron‘s younger sister, but she wasn‘t pointing at Ron.
He went straight to the window and jerked it open.
They had a good time eating the Every-Flavour Beans.
His heart hammered as he crept across the dark hall towards the front door -
Ron looked at his watch and then glared furiously at Hermione and Neville.
The hundreds of faces staring at them looked like pale lanterns in the flickering candlelight.
He had no idea what Mr Ollivander was waiting for.
He looked at Hagrid furiously but then dropped his gaze.
‘I tell you, we‘re going to win that Quidditch Cup for sure this year,‘ said Fred.
‘Sniff around, my sweet, they might be lurking in a corner.‘
‘It‘s not a stoat sandwich, is it?‘ said Harry anxiously and at last Hagrid gave a weak chuckle.
He‘d done it - the game was over; it had barely lasted five minutes.
The Dursleys were cowering against the wall.
‘See?‘ said Hermione, when Harry and Ron had finished.
He was carrying a large wooden crate under his arm.
Everyone was silent, staring up at the great castle overhead.
‘But what happened to Vol- sorry - I mean, You-Know-Who?‘
‘Nearly there!‘ Harry panted as they reached the corridor beneath the tallest tower.
‘STUDENTS OUT OF BED DOWN THE CHARMS CORRIDOR!‘
‘There‘s summat bad loose in this Forest. This is Harry Potter an‘ Hermione Granger, by the way.
‘- and he said people from Muggle families shouldn‘t even be allowed in -‘
‘Are you all right?‘ said the centaur, pulling Harry to his feet.
There was quite a lot of money in that wad and if I took it, I would have to leave town.
‘Had to let that happen,‘ said Ron, looking shaken.
Ron reached inside his jacket and pulled out a fat grey rat, which was asleep.
‘Don‘t talk to me for a moment,‘ said Ron when Harry sat down next to him.
Wandering around in the middle of the night, how dare you
There was no point beating about the bush.
‘Ah, shut up, Dursley, yeh great prune,‘ said the giant.
‘Neville,‘ she said, ‘I‘m really, really sorry about this.‘
‘Are all your family wizards?‘ asked Harry, who found Ron just as interesting as Ron found him.
After a good night‘s sleep, Harry felt nearly back to normal.
They settled down in the boat, Harry still staring at Hagrid, trying to imagine him flying.
‘Best be off, Harry, lots ter do today, gotta get up ter London an‘ buy all yer stuff fer school.
The same thought seemed to have struck Malfoy.
Ron turned the binoculars back on Harry.
There were still spots of unicorn blood here and there along the winding path.
‘Oh, yes,‘ said Mr Dursley, his heart sinking horribly.
‘Tut, tut - fame clearly isn‘t everything.‘
‘No more revision,‘ Ron sighed happily, stretching out on the grass.
With a last look at Harry, the twins hopped off the train.
The trees were so thick he couldn‘t see where Snape had gone.
‘Hey, look - Harry‘s got a Weasley jumper, too!‘
He turned and cantered back into the depths of the Forest, leaving Harry shivering behind him.
Harry‘s legs were like lead again, but only because he was so tired and full of food.
‘Harry, Professor Quirrell will be one of your teachers at Hogwarts.‘
No more dragon - Malfoy in detention - what could spoil their happiness?
Neville had been sobbing into Hagrid‘s jacket for the last five minutes.
‘I found out something about him,‘ he told Hagrid.
They hadn‘t realised how loudly they had been talking.
At either end of the pitch were three golden poles with hoops on the end.
He put Hedwig inside first and then started to shove and heave his trunk towards the train door.
‘Calm yourself, dear boy, you are a little behind the times,‘ said Dumbledore.
His whole body rigid, he swayed where he stood and then fell flat on his face, stiff as a board.
‘I think we‘ve lost him,‘ Harry panted, leaning against the cold wall and wiping his forehead.
‘Students, are you? And do you learn much, up at the school?‘
‘He really knows me now, watch. Norbert! Norbert! Where‘s Mummy?‘
‘Hagrid and my aunt and uncle - so who sent these?‘
Finally he said, ‘Now, don‘t be offended or anything, but neither of you are that good at chess -‘
Uncle Vernon‘s rations turned out to be a packet of crisps each and four bananas.
‘Should tell Filch, I should,‘ said Peeves in a saintly voice, but his eyes glittered wickedly.
An owl hooted loudly and Harry nearly fell out of the tree.
Harry took the parchment envelope out of his pocket.
‘You know what this means?‘ he finished breathlessly.
He tried not to look at Malfoy, Crabbe and Goyle, who were shaking with laughter.
‘I don‘t know ... sounds like wings to me.‘
Harry was so close to the mirror now that his nose was nearly touching that of his reflection.
Harry groped for the doorknob - between Filch and death, he‘d take Filch.
The students all hated him and it was the dearest ambition of many to give Mrs Norris a good kick.
Harry caught a glimpse of her face - and was startled to see that she was in tears.
Standing beside its burnished bronze doors, wearing a uniform of scarlet and gold, was -
‘Go away, Peeves, or the Baron‘ll hear about this, I mean it!‘ barked Percy.
There was a horrible smell in the kitchen next morning when Harry went in for breakfast.
‘Could you write it down?‘ Harry suggested.
‘You‘re the only one who knows how to get past Fluffy, aren‘t you, Hagrid?‘ said Harry anxiously.
Hermione buried her face in her arms; Harry strongly suspected she had burst into tears.
‘Look, if you don‘t hurry up, he‘ll already have the Stone!‘
‘Er - Petunia, dear - you haven‘t heard from your sister lately, have you?‘
‘Well, well, well,‘ he whispered, ‘we are in trouble.‘
‘It‘s too late to change the plan now,‘ Harry told Hermione.
Harry could see three letters addressed in green ink.
‘Fifty points each,‘ said Professor McGonagall, breathing heavily through her long pointed nose.
Ron had already had a big argument with Dean Thomas, who shared their dormitory, about football.
Hermione had now started making revision timetables for Harry and Ron, too.
‘Half past eleven,‘ Ron muttered at last.
As Harry helped himself to a treacle tart, the talk turned to their families.
He fell asleep as we was flyin‘ over Bristol.‘
The smell coming from it was incredible.
He walked up to a black knight and put his hand out to touch the knight‘s horse.
We spent the evening together, talking about Bermuda.
When Angelina had scored, Harry had done a couple of loop- the-loops to let out his feelings.
‘Hope your business goes well, Baron, I‘ll not bother you.‘ And he scooted off.
He‘d had it with sneaking around and spying.
Ron was so amazed, so impressed, he just sat and gaped at Harry.
‘Stupid spell - George gave it to me, bet he knew it was a dud.‘
It was always a nasty shock when one of them glided suddenly through a door you were trying to open.
Hermione Granger, telling a downright lie to a teacher?
‘We wondered who Dumbledore had trusted enough to help him, apart from you.‘
‘Well, I‘ve bin doin‘ some readin‘,‘ said Hagrid, pulling a large book from under his pillow.
‘I‘ll need something to look forward to.‘
‘Oh, shut up,‘ said Hermione, but she agreed to go and watch out for Snape.
‘It‘s too dark, we might lose it. Tet‘s try you out with a few of these.‘
Madam Hooch was bending over Neville, her face as white as his.
‘Only don‘t tell anyone, Wood wants to keep it a secret.‘
‘Maybe Peeves let it in for a Hallowe‘en joke.‘
‘It‘s that stupid thing Longbottom‘s gran sent him.‘
He understood what he had to do all right, it was doing it that was going to be the problem.
‘Hurry up, boy, we haven‘t got all day.‘ He walked away.
A sudden noise outside in the corridor put an end to their discussion.
Professor McGonagall was running towards them.
Little did Harry know that Ron and Hermione had been secretly practising the Leg-Locker Curse.
Was this normal cat behaviour, Mr Dursley wondered.
He didn‘t feel like sharing it with anyone else yet.
You should see the burns Charlie‘s got off wild ones in Romania.
‘He wants payin‘ fer deliverin‘ the paper. Look in the pockets.‘
‘I just take the train from platform nine and three-quarters at eleven o‘clock,‘ he read.
Harry, who had expected more marble, was surprised.
Inside was a large, sticky chocolate cake with Happy Birthday Harry written on it in green icing.
Dudley‘s favourite punch-bag was Harry, but he couldn‘t often catch him.
Peeves threw the chalk into a bin, which clanged loudly, and he swooped out cursing.
At this, Hermione stood up, her hand stretching towards the dungeon ceiling.
On the corner he stopped and took out the silver Put-Outer.
‘But Harry - what if You-Know-Who‘s with him?‘
I opened the door clumsily and stood in the doorway.
It sounded as though someone was threatening him.
No sooner were they out of earshot than Malfoy burst into laughter.
Uncle Vernon was back and he was smiling.
Harry recognised him at once from the card he‘d got out of the Chocolate Frog on the train.
Yet something had been nagging at the back of his mind all day.
‘Well - I was lucky once, wasn‘t I?‘ said Harry, pointing at his scar.
Hermione had got both her breath and her bad temper back again.
‘I‘ve heard of his family,‘ said Ron darkly.
‘Listen, we‘re going down the middle of the train - Lee Jordan‘s got a giant tarantula down there.‘
He remembered being picked for teams during sports lessons at his old school.
Uncle Vernon and Aunt Petunia kept looking at each other darkly.
‘An‘ I‘ve packed his teddy bear in case he gets lonely.
It was indeed as though ice was flooding his body.
Even at a distance there was no mistaking him.
‘Shut up, Malfoy,‘ snapped Parvati Patil.
When he turned his back on them, Harry saw a curly pig‘s tail poking through a hole in his trousers.
‘Me dad‘s a Muggle. Mam didn‘t tell him she was a witch ‘til after they were married.
At five to three they left the castle and made their way across the grounds.
‘Asked him. Saw his scar. It‘s really there - like lightning.‘
He thought two of his ribs might already have cracked from trying not to laugh.
‘We‘ve got to get back to Gryffindor Tower,‘ said Ron, ‘quickly as possible.‘
Fred and George Weasley now came into the hall, spotted Harry and hurried over.
‘I wasn‘t looking at its feet, I was too busy with its heads.‘
He looked back at the whisperers as if he wanted to say something to them, but thought better of it.
It took perhaps thirty seconds for Snape to realise that he was on fire.
‘Don‘t, Ginny, we‘ll send you loads of owls.‘
They all drew their chairs up to the table and watched with bated breath.
‘Thanks,‘ said Harry, pushing his sweaty hair out of his eyes.
‘But yeh must know about yer mum and dad,‘ he said.
Hermione Granger was almost as nervous about flying as Neville was.
Leaving the station, I walked slowly through the bazaar, keeping to dark, deserted alleys.
And Harry knew it would be no good to argue.
Ron picked up a green bean, looked at it carefully and bit into a corner.
‘Do they? What, they don‘t move at all?‘ Ron sounded amazed.
‘But Snape always seemed to hate me so much.‘
The tall, thin, black-haired man standing next to her put his arm around her.
‘What was that thing you saved me from, anyway?‘
He glanced at Harry and then looked quickly out of the window, pretending he hadn‘t looked.
‘Stop right there, sir! I forbid you to tell the boy anything!‘
Professor McGonagall stopped outside a classroom.
‘He thinks this door is locked,‘ Harry whispered.
”My spirit rose as rapidly as it had fallen.
‘How did I get the Stone out of the Mirror?‘
His face went from red to green faster than a set of traffic lights.
‘Swap you for one of these,‘ said Harry, holding up a pasty.
There was simply no way that Snape would dare to try and hurt him if Dumbledore was watching.
‘Welcome back, Mr Potter, welcome back.‘
Compared with the Quaffle and the Bludgers, it was tiny, about the size of a large walnut.
‘Better Hufflepuff than Slytherin,‘ said Hagrid darkly.
He pushed his trolley round and stared at the barrier.
Any second now, Professor McGonagall would come back and lead him to his doom.
‘Oh, sorry, Weasley, didn‘t see you there.‘
‘How can it? All my family are dead - let me have another look -‘
George Weasley really did fall off his broom at these words.
All at once there was a scraping noise and the egg split open.
Harry kept looking nervously over his shoulder.
Perhaps Harry had eaten a bit too much, because he had a very strange dream.
He didn‘t know what time it was and he couldn‘t be sure the Dursleys were asleep yet.
Harry had almost forgotten that the exam results were still to come, but come they did.
‘Comets look flashy, but they‘re not in the same league as the Nimbus.‘
‘Keep playing,‘ Ron warned Harry as they slipped out of the Cloak and crept towards the trapdoor.
‘It certainly seems so,‘ said Dumbledore.
‘And that reminds me - Harry Ron, we‘ve got half an hour before lunch, we should be in the library,‘
‘Excuse me,‘ Harry said to the plump woman.
Harry unwrapped his Chocolate Frog and picked up the card.
‘Devil‘s Snare, Devil‘s Snare ... What did Professor Sprout say? It likes the dark and the damp -‘
He recognised the figure‘s prowling walk.
He didn‘t feel much like going into the matter with this boy.
‘Sorry,‘ he grunted, as the tiny old man stumbled and almost fell.
He gripped the broom tightly with both his hands and knees.
Then he choked and said, ‘Alas! Earwax!‘
Your father left this in my possession before he died.
Uncle Vernon had parked at the coast, locked them all inside the car and disappeared.
Harry tried to take a step backwards but his legs wouldn‘t move.
‘And this gentleman‘s kindly agreed to lend us his boat!‘
‘He‘s not exactly recent if he‘s six hundred and sixty-five, is he?‘
Hagrid took up two seats and sat knitting what looked like a canary-yellow circus tent.
‘I suppose we‘ve got to take the place of three of the black pieces ...‘
‘No, no - here, ebony and unicorn hair, eight and a half inches, springy. Go on, go on, try it out.‘
Hermione looked very frightened, but she had a word of comfort.
‘I shouldn‘ta told yeh that!‘ he blurted out.
Madam Pomfrey, the matron, was a nice woman, but very strict.
Aunt Petunia looked as though she‘d just swallowed a lemon.
He pocketed it to use on Fluffy - he didn‘t feel much like singing.
Their trunks had already been brought up.
‘It‘s - it‘s true ?‘ faltered Professor McGonagall.
If he hadn‘t, he might have found it harder to concentrate on drills that morning.
He cast a sideways look at Harry under his bushy eyebrows.
‘If I didn‘ know better, I‘d say he‘d lost control of his broom ... but he can‘t have ...‘
Those patient Hufflepuffs are true And unafraid of toil;
Something very painful was going on in Harry‘s mind.
‘Good evening to you, Hagrid,‘ said Ronan.
Uncle Vernon ripped open the bill, snorted in disgust and flipped over the postcard.
‘Honestly, Hermione, you think all teachers are saints or something,‘ snapped Ron.
Passers-by stared a lot at Hagrid as they walked through the little town to the station.
‘You can‘t blame them,‘ said Dumbledore gently.
‘I don‘t need a cloak to become invisible,‘ said Dumbledore gently.
‘Don‘t be stupid,‘ snapped Aunt Petunia.
Marcus Flint seized the Quaffle and scored five times without anyone noticing.
‘I don‘t know how deep this thing goes. Give the flute to Hermione so she can keep him asleep.‘
It hesitated, then made for him instead, lifting its club as it went.
‘He is with me wherever I go,‘ said Quirrell quietly.
‘So the Stone‘s gone?‘ said Ron finally.
Yet Harry couldn‘t help thinking that Hagrid didn‘t quite meet his eyes when he said that.
‘I think I‘ll leave it somewhere for Longbottom to collect - how about - up a tree?‘
The next morning dawned very bright and cold.
But then, he thought, as he shoved Scabbers off his pillow, it had been quite a personal question.
There was suddenly a loud tapping noise.
‘Oh, well done!‘ cried Professor Flitwick, clapping.
Aunt Petunia took it curiously and read the first line.
Dumbledore‘s twinkling eyes flashed in the direction of the Weasley twins.
Ron‘s were a bit short for him, you could see his trainers underneath them.
There were about a hundred rupees in fives.
The nearest street lamp went out with a little pop.
Sitting on one of the desks by the wall was none other than Albus Dumbledore.
‘Mm?‘ said Hagrid, who was pulling on his huge boots.
‘How many days you got left until yer holidays?‘ Hagrid asked.
‘He might have died and you wouldn‘t know the difference,‘ said Ron in disgust.
Lee Jordan was finding it difficult not to take sides.
By next morning, Ron‘s bitten hand had swollen to twice its usual size.
‘What is the difference, Potter, between monkshood and wolfsbane?‘
‘It was a dream,‘ he told himself firmly.
‘We want to see Professor Dumbledore,‘ said Hermione, rather bravely, Harry and Ron thought.
Ron, though, was staring transfixed at his image.
Harry had never in all his life had such a Christmas dinner.
‘Ooh, sticking up for Longbottom?‘ said Pansy Parkinson, a hard-faced Slytherin girl.
Way up above them, Harry was gliding over the game, squinting about for some sign of the Snitch.
‘Now, don‘t ask me any more,‘ said Hagrid gruffly.
‘Me,‘ he said calmly, ‘I wondered whether I‘d be meeting you here, Potter.‘
Fang rested his head on Harry‘s knee and drooled all over his robes.
Hagrid lived in a small wooden house on the edge of the Forbidden Forest.
‘Well - I don‘ like sayin‘ the name if I can help it. No one does.‘
‘Everyone here? You there, still got yer toad?‘
‘I‘ve been thinking ... Sir - even if the Stone‘s gone, Vol- ... I mean, You-Know-Who
Nobody bothered them; none of the Gryffindors had anything to say to Harry any more, after all.
‘Good evening, Hagrid, I hope you are well?‘
Dumbledore reached out and patted her on the shoulder.
He gave it to Neville, who looked as though he might cry.
The snake suddenly opened its beady eyes.
‘Do you realise who this is?‘ said Firenze.
‘- tell yer that‘s how it is at Hogwarts,‘ Hagrid growled.
‘You won‘t be. There‘s loads of people who come from Muggle families and they learn quick enough.‘
Harry thought the blood seemed to be getting thicker.
‘Do we - er - have to join you to get across?‘
‘Great food, isn‘t it?‘ Ron muttered to Harry through the hangings.
‘Yes, yes. I thought I‘d be seeing you soon. Harry Potter.‘ It wasn‘t a question.
‘My father‘s next door buying my books and mother‘s up the street looking at wands,‘ said the boy.
‘Come on, cheer up, it‘s nearly Christmas,‘ said Hagrid.
‘Now, form a line,‘ Professor McGonagall told the first-years, ‘and follow me.‘
‘How did he get covered in blood?‘ asked Seamus with great interest.
‘I think it‘s a warning ... it means danger‘s coming ...‘
On top of the stool she put a pointed wizard‘s hat.
He flew in circles, lower and lower, brushing the top branches of trees until he heard voices.
Hagrid shuffled into view, hiding something behind his back.
Today he‘d rather be back in his cupboard with that letter than up here without it.
Or perhaps in Slytherin You‘ll make your real friends,
He flopped back into his seat, looking depressed.
Vault seven hundred and thirteen had no keyhole.
He took off the hat and walked shakily towards the Gryffindor table.
No one seemed to have noticed that Harry‘s broom was behaving strangely.
‘Shut up, both of you!‘ said Harry sharply.
‘Yeah, that‘s a goblin,‘ said Hagrid quietly as they walked up the white stone steps towards him.
‘You don‘t think they‘ve been hurt, do you?‘ whispered Hermione.
He said that Poland would never pay her debts.
Facing them, way across the chamber, were the white pieces.
‘Yes, but not to us,‘ said Ron in exasperation.
‘That Gringotts break-in happened on my birthday! It might‘ve been happening while we were there!‘
When Professor McGonagall appeared, she was leading Neville
‘Not arguing, I hope, boys?‘ he squeaked.
‘There‘s summat in here that shouldn‘ be.
The Amritsar Express was just moving out.
He saw the three of them look stunned and raised his eyebrows.
It was strange to the touch, like water woven into material.
Dear Harry, (it said, in a very untidy scrawl)
‘Storm forecast for tonight!‘ said Uncle Vernon gleefully clapping his hands together.
He had never won so much as a point for Gryffindor before.
‘A stone that makes gold and stops you ever dying!‘ said Harry.
Please find enclosed a list of all necessary books and equipment.
‘Well done,‘ said Dumbledore quietly, so that only Harry could hear.
‘I‘m sorry to say I sold the wand that did it,‘ he said softly.
Then, during one particularly wet and muddy practice session, Wood gave the team a bit of bad news.
‘Harry, please relax, or Madam Pomfrey will have me thrown out.‘
Hermione was checking Harry and Ron‘s Charms homework for them.
There were empty brandy bottles and chicken feathers all over the floor.
‘And you‘ve got dirt on your nose, by the way, did you know?‘
Harry watched the girl and her mother disappear as the train rounded the corner.
The afternoon‘s events certainly seemed to have changed her mind about Snape.
He steadied himself in time to hear Snape say your little bit of hocus pocus.
Hagrid‘s big hairy face beamed over the sea of heads.
Harry unfolded a second piece of paper he hadn‘t noticed the night before and read:
He turned to smile at the tabby, but it had gone.
As they entered November, the weather turned very cold.
He paced up and down in front of the fire.
‘Tell me the truth! What did you just see?‘
It was only then that Harry realised what was standing behind Quirrell.
‘Well - in that case ...‘ said Professor McGonagall, staring at the three of them.
‘There‘s still Fluffy, though,‘ said Hermione.
I was fascinated by his tranquil features and remained motionless for a minute.
He was liking the boy less and less every second.
They marched off across the dark grounds.
They edged towards the open door, mouths dry, praying the troll wasn‘t about to come out of it.
‘Couldn‘t you do something about it, Dumbledore?‘
In his vast, muscular arms he was holding a bundle of blankets.
It was covered in what looked like lumpy grey glue.
‘Hey, Mum, guess what? Guess who we just met on the train?‘
He didn‘t know why, but they made him uneasy.
Then he looked quickly around to see if anyone was watching.
Uncle Vernon grunted to show he was listening.
‘We‘re nearly there,‘ he muttered suddenly.
She grabbed Harry‘s wand, tapped the lock and whispered, ‘Alohomora!‘
At once, the black ball rose high in the air and then pelted straight at Harry‘s face.
Harry had even less time than the other two, because Quidditch practice had started again.
‘Oh, sorry,‘ said the other, not sounding sorry at all.
‘And you could ask your parents if they know who Flamel is,‘ said Ron.
Uncle Vernon made a funny rasping noise.
But Hermione had given Harry something else to think about as he climbed back into bed.
It was a very sunny Saturday and the zoo was crowded with families.
‘I need to concen-‘ He caught sight of Harry‘s face.
She looked more likely to breathe fire than Norbert as she towered over the three of them.
‘I‘m fine,‘ said Harry, hardly knowing what he was saying.
Harry climbed over it and looked down through the trapdoor.
Add Norbert and the Invisibility Cloak and they might as well be packing their bags already.
Come to think of it, he wasn‘t even sure his nephew was called Harry.
Neville had panicked and sent up the sparks.
Now there were woods, twisting rivers and dark green hills.
It’s easy to rob a rich man because he can afford to be robbed.
‘Well, that‘s it then, isn‘t it?‘ Harry said.
‘Make it move,‘ he whined at his father.
He got into his car and backed out of number four‘s drive.
How much had he heard? Harry didn‘t like the look on Malfoy‘s face at all.
He had written only two words: It‘s hatching.
‘However, recent events must be taken into account.‘
Then a sudden movement ahead of them made them almost drop the crate.
‘You nearly were, I couldn‘t have kept him off the Stone much longer -‘
The answer to that was waiting at the foot of the stairs.
But leaving Neville lying motionless on the floor didn‘t feel like a very good omen.
‘Yes, yes, well done, Slytherin,‘ said Dumbledore.
He had been looking forward to learning to fly more than anything else.
Harry didn‘t know where to run first now that he had a bag full of money.
He stared unblinkingly upwards, then sighed again.
‘Don‘ go shoutin‘ about it, what‘s the matter with yeh?‘
Hagrid‘s chest swelled at these last words.
‘There‘s not a single witch or wizard who went bad who wasn‘t in Slytherin. You-Know-Who was one.‘
This was something you couldn‘t learn by heart out of a book - not that she hadn‘t tried.
Harry wished they wouldn‘t, because he was trying to concentrate on finding his way to classes.
Harry and Ron were delighted to hear Hagrid call Filch ‘that old git‘-
Harry felt as though his insides had turned to ice.
‘Wingardium Leviosa!‘ he shouted, waving his long arms like a windmill.
There were no photographs of them in the house.
‘But I c-c-can‘t stand it - Lily an‘ James dead - an‘ poor little Harry off ter live with Muggles -‘
Dudley, meanwhile, was counting his presents.
‘It‘s the full Body-Bind,‘ said Hermione miserably.
He was sure there were lots of people called Potter who had a son called Harry.
By the end of the first Potions lesson, he knew he‘d been wrong.
‘Madam Pomfrey mended it in about a minute.‘
‘Er - well, I‘m right-handed,‘ said Harry.
‘I‘m going out of here tonight and I‘m going to try and get to the Stone first.‘
Neville was snoring loudly, but Harry couldn‘t sleep.
He probably knew everything - except, it seemed, Quirrell‘s spell and how to get past Fluffy.
They had drawn for the House Cup - if only Dumbledore had given Harry just one more point.
‘No, we‘ll ignore it. If they don‘t get an answer ... yes, that‘s best ... we won‘t do anything ...‘
The tub was full of what looked like dirty rags swimming in grey water.
The twins slid the compartment door shut behind them.
It was wrapped in thick brown paper and scrawled across it was To Harry, from Hagrid.
He didn‘t seem at all upset at being almost knocked to the ground.
‘Haven‘t I told you he‘s not going?‘ he hissed.
Harry cheered up a bit when he found a bottle of ink that changed colour as you wrote.
‘Look!‘ Hermione seized a roll of paper lying next to the bottles.
‘We‘ve only used the horn and tail-hair in Potions.‘
Dudley had a place at Uncle Vernon‘s old school, Smeltings.
‘You know that black-haired boy who was near us in the station? Know who he is?‘
Dudley stopped pretending to cry at once.
A light breeze lifted their hair as they looked into the Forest.
‘I never expected this,‘ he said, in a low, worried voice.
A few people laughed; Harry caught Seamus‘s eye and Seamus winked.
Harry woke at five o‘clock the next morning and was too excited and nervous to go back to sleep.
Choose, unless you wish to stay here for evermore,
‘It‘s tonight,‘ said Harry, once he was sure Professor McGonagall was out of earshot.
His broom was vibrating so hard, it was almost impossible for him to hang on much longer.
He seemed quite fascinated by the wrestling.
‘I - told - you,‘ Hermione gasped, clutching at the stitch in her chest.
He came to a sudden halt in front of a tall suit of armour.
Ron also started teaching Harry wizard chess.
When he was dressed he went down the hall into the kitchen.
‘What was he hiding behind his back?‘ said Hermione thoughtfully.
‘Is that you, Filch? Hurry up, I want ter get started.‘
‘Starving,‘ said Harry, taking a large bite out of a pumpkin pasty.
Even Harry, who knew nothing about the different brooms, thought it looked wonderful.
At last she found what she was looking for.
‘What are you doing, checking for letter-bombs?‘ He chuckled at his own joke.
‘He‘s lost his marbles,‘ Ron muttered in Harry‘s ear.
Harry ripped open the letter first, which was lucky, because it said:
‘Oh.‘ Dudley sat down heavily and grabbed the nearest parcel.
As night fell, the promised storm blew up around them.
Harry didn‘t look it, but he was very fast.
‘All right - all right he heard Quirrell sob.
He had a powerful kind of ache inside him, half joy, half terrible sadness.
‘We‘ve got to play our way across the room.‘
‘Ever since you mentioned Nicolas Flamel we‘ve been trying to find out who he is.‘
Perhaps Snape had left the book in there? It was worth a try.
At the top of the Hall was another long table where the teachers were sitting.
‘This way‘ said Harry, pointing down a stone passageway which was the only way on.
‘The whole school‘s out there!‘ said Fred Weasley, peering out of the door.
He threw his cloak over his head and strode out of the clearing.
Snape gave Harry a swift, piercing look.
Harry was frying eggs by the time Dudley arrived in the kitchen with his mother.
He bent down, picked up the door and fitted it easily back into its frame.
Mr Dursley blinked and stared at the cat.
‘I won‘t blow up the house,‘ said Harry, but they weren‘t listening.
In his anger he seemed to fill the whole hut.
There was a loud bark from the dog, but Hermione had already jumped.
‘Has anyone seen a toad? Neville‘s lost one,‘ she said.
He was looking at Harry with a lot more interest than he‘d shown back in Diagon Alley.
Harry stared at the back of Firenze‘s head, which was dappled silver in the moonlight.
Something was slithering over dead leaves nearby: it sounded like a cloak trailing along the ground.
‘I know that,‘ said Professor McGonagall irritably.
They were cold and empty and made you think of dark tunnels.
‘Don‘t talk rubbish,‘ said Uncle Vernon, ‘there is no platform nine and three-quarters.‘
His heart sank faster than he‘d just dived.
‘Hagrid,‘ said Dumbledore, sounding relieved.
He had to clap his hands to his mouth to stop himself screaming.
This was supposed to be good training for later life.
The repaired alarm clock rang at six o‘clock the next morning.
Professor McGonagall was looking at Ron and Harry.
He took a few deep breaths and then forced his face into a smile, which looked quite painful.
Harry didn‘t think there was anything wrong with not being able to afford an owl.
Harry told them everything: Quirrell; the Mirror; the Stone and Voldemort.
Their feather rose off the desk and hovered about four feet above their heads.
‘Hi, Hagrid, want any help?‘ Ron asked, sticking his head through the branches.
‘Dragon-breeding was outlawed by the Warlocks‘ Convention of 1709, everyone knows that.
A pair of goblins bowed them through the silver doors and they were in a vast marble hall.
They were whispering excitedly together.
Harry was very relieved to find out that he wasn‘t miles behind everyone else.
The sky was a clear, forget-me-not blue and there was a feeling in the air of summer coming.
Harry was going to ask Ron if he‘d had any of the treacle tart, but he fell asleep almost at once.
It was carrying him slowly higher, away from the game, jerking and twitching as it went.
‘I‘m warning you, Malfoy - one more word -‘
‘I‘m not Fred, I‘m George,‘ said the boy.
‘You must come and stay this summer,‘ said Ron, ‘both of you - I‘ll send you an owl.‘
‘Where do you come from, anyway?‘ Harry asked.
Snape finished calling the names and looked up at the class.
He had a knack for spotting things other people didn‘t.
Dudley quickly found the largest snake in the place.
‘Stop saying the name!‘ said Ron in a terrified whisper, as if he thought Voldemort could hear them.
‘White always plays first in chess,‘ said Ron, peering across the board.
‘Will you stop messing around!‘ he yelled.
Hagrid raised a gigantic fist and knocked three times on the castle door.
He was humming merrily as he stoked the fire.
Slipping out of the blanket, I crept up to the bed and peeped at Arun.
He glided towards them and landed noiselessly in a towering beech tree.
For a famous place, it was very dark and shabby.
‘Why don‘t we go down and visit Hagrid?‘
I could live like a prince for a month or two.
On Saturday, things began to get out of hand.
Hopes of winning fifty points for Gryffindor faded quickly from Harry‘s mind.
‘You‘re lucky you weren‘t killed. Why aren‘t you in your dormitory?‘
He smiled and popped the golden-brown bean into his mouth.
Draco Malfoy didn‘t go red, but a pink tinge appeared in his pale cheeks.
Another will transport the drinker back instead,
The Snitch! He tried to catch it, but his arms were too heavy.
He had a swarthy, clever face, a pointed beard and, Harry noticed, very long fingers and feet.
Harry noticed that they seemed to be straining to escape the straps holding them inside the box.
‘Good luck, Harry Potter,‘ said Firenze.
‘Leaves you free to take that bishop, Hermione, go on.‘
Until they were, he couldn‘t risk sneaking to the kitchen for some food.
He waved his wand, but nothing happened.
Ron appeared out of nowhere as he pulled off Harry‘s Invisibility Cloak.
‘Never mind that now,‘ said Harry breathlessly.
The night was chilly and I regretted not having brought Arun’s blanket along.
Up in the air, Harry was suddenly able to clamber back on to his broom.
Harry jumped to his feet, caught Quirrell by the arm and hung on as tight as he could.
At that moment, Madam Pomfrey bustled over.
A lot of green smoke came billowing out, and as it cleared, Harry gasped.
I have made a study of men’s faces when they have lost something of material value.
Petrified, he watched as Quirrell reached up and began to unwrap his turban.
She was staring at her slippers, as still as a statue.
As the door creaked, low, rumbling growls met their ears.
He was glaring at Hagrid and his fists were clenched.
He looked very pleased with himself, but Hermione didn‘t.
A second, very small parcel contained a note.
It was Hermione Granger, wearing a pink dressing-gown and a frown.
So try me on and I will tell you Where you ought to be.
Harry turned it off quickly and dressed silently.
‘I‘ve already got us some rations,‘ said Uncle Vernon, ‘so all aboard!‘
Harry and Ron managed to get on the wrong side of him on their very first morning.
Mr Ollivander touched the lightning scar on Harry‘s forehead with a long, white finger.
At last, he said, ‘The Forest hides many secrets.‘
She hadn‘t looked so excited since they‘d got back the marks for their very first piece of homework.
‘This is it,‘ said Hagrid, coming to a halt, ‘the Leaky Cauldron. It‘s a famous place.‘
‘That‘s Hagrid,‘ said Harry, pleased to know something the boy didn‘t.
‘I‘m with Harry. I wouldn‘t put anything past Snape. But what‘s he after? What‘s that dog guarding?‘
Arun was watching the wrestlers when I approached him.
‘But we‘re not six hundred years old,‘ Ron reminded her.
“It’s time I did some real work,” I told myself.
‘Throw it away and punch him on the nose,‘ Ron suggested.
‘Now, when I blow my whistle, you kick off from the ground, hard,‘ said Madam Hooch.
At last, Norbert was going ... going ... gone.
Obviously he thought nobody stood a chance of reaching them here in a storm to deliver post.
‘Didn‘t you see what it was standing on?‘
Harry explained about their meeting in Diagon Alley.
But as they stepped into it, light suddenly flooded the room to reveal an astonishing sight.
‘We don‘t want you attacked before you have to be.‘
Hermione didn‘t turn up for the next class and wasn‘t seen all afternoon.
Looking down at his legs, he saw only moonlight and shadows.
Harry felt, afterwards, that he should have known it was all too good to last.
Slowly, very slowly, it raised its head until its eyes were on a level with Harry‘s.
He pulled the handle, but it was locked.
Seeing the open door somehow seemed to impress upon all three of them what was facing them.
‘Marge‘s ill,‘ he informed Aunt Petunia.
‘Just a bit of toast,‘ wheedled Hermione.
He handed Harry a small club, a bit like a rounders bat.
It was as if Snape had started handing out sweets.
Shooting stars down in Kent - I‘ll bet that was Dedalus Diggle.
‘We must be miles under the school,‘ she said.
Fourth, the second left and the second on the right
‘Look -‘ he murmured, holding out his arm to stop Malfoy.
‘I‘m not going to do anything,‘ said Harry, ‘honestly ...‘
‘A Nimbus Two Thousand!‘ Ron moaned enviously.
A single wand lay on a faded purple cushion in the dusty window.
I will immediately write their names down on paper.
Yet sometimes he thought (or maybe hoped) that strangers in the street seemed to know him.
‘But see what the card is, I‘m missing Agrippa.‘ ‘What?‘
‘Sir! The Stone! It was Quirrell! He‘s got the Stone! Sir, quick -‘
The goblin was about a head shorter than Harry.
Like Hagrid, Fang was clearly not as fierce as he looked.
‘He always sp-spoils everything!‘ He shot Harry a nasty grin through the gap in his mother‘s arms.
‘I‘m worth twelve of you, Malfoy,‘ he stammered.
PARENTS ARE REMINDED THAT FIRST-YEARS ARE NOT
I would take my time buying the day’s supplies and make a profit of about twenty-five paise a day.
He himself darted around the board taking almost as many white pieces as they had lost black ones.
Bane walked over to stand next to Ronan.
Before Ron could say another word, Hermione had disappeared.
‘Hagrid, can we have a window open? I‘m boiling.‘
‘I‘d like ter see a great Muggle like you stop him,‘ he said.
Harry jumped back on his Nimbus Two Thousand and took off.
‘Don‘t worry about that,‘ said Hagrid, standing up and scratching his head.
‘We‘ll just have to -‘ Harry began, but a voice suddenly rang across the hall.
‘We‘ve got to go, we‘re going to be late.‘
Harry dropped the Cloak from round his shoulders and ran to the mirror.
‘Would it be all right if you gave me a lift?‘
Something gold was glinting just above him.
As a surprise for Harry, they had painted a large banner on one of the sheets Scabbers had ruined.
I had a key to the front door, which meant I could enter the room whenever Arun was out.
‘I think I can tell who the wrong sort are for myself, thanks,‘ he said coolly.
Behind the white pieces they could see another door.
The keeper of the reptile house was in shock.
‘Oh, we‘re not working,‘ Harry told him brightly.
Both of them were thinking about what they were about to do.
Their daring, nerve and chivalry Set Gryffindors apart;
‘He caught that thing in his hand after a fifty-foot dive,‘ Professor McGonagall told Wood.
He knew Neville, like himself, was dreading the dawn.
The two boys gawped at him and Harry felt himself going red.
‘Hmmm,‘ said Mr Ollivander, giving Hagrid a piercing look.
‘Petrificus Totalus!‘ she cried, pointing it at Neville.
‘All right, thirty-seven then,‘ said Dudley, going red in the face.
‘That‘s enough, Mr Weasley. Potter, follow me, now.‘
Hermione Granger was shrinking against the wall opposite, looking as if she was about to faint.
And now there were only three people left to be sorted.
Sellotaped to the note was a fifty-pence piece.
He stumbled backwards and knocked over his lamp, which went out at once.
‘Get out of the way.‘ snapped Ron, taking a swipe at Peeves - this was a big mistake.
‘If I was ter - er - speed things up a bit, would yeh mind not mentionin‘ it at Hogwarts?‘
‘Always wanted to shake your hand - I‘m all of a flutter.‘
He turned his broomstick sharply to face Malfoy in mid-air.
‘You should have said something, we had no idea.‘
‘That will do,‘ he said, and the tape measure crumpled into a heap on the floor.
‘I think I‘ve got a good idea of what‘s been going on,‘ said Professor McGonagall.
‘Good of her to get us out of trouble like that,‘ Ron admitted.
As he had expected, Mrs Dursley looked shocked and angry.
To help you in your choice, we give you these clues four:
Harry‘s stomach lurched with nerves and Ron, he saw, looked pale under his freckles.
‘What are these?‘ Harry asked Ron, holding up a pack of
‘So why did he just try and kill Harry?‘ cried Hermione.
At last, only the Weasley twins were left singing along to a very slow funeral march.
He felt so ashamed of himself that he went to Wood and offered to resn from the Quidditch team.
‘And it‘s really thanks to Malfoy here that I‘ve got it,‘ he added.
‘Take him up to the hospital wing,‘ Snape spat at Seamus.
Underneath the Cloak, Harry turned to the other two.
‘Ready?‘ Ron called, his face pale but determined.
‘Gulpin‘ gargoyles, Harry people are still scared.
‘The Philosopher‘s Stone! Of course - the Elixir of Life! But I don‘t understand who -‘
‘Never mind that, do you think he remembers what You-Know- Who looks like?‘
Albus Dumbledore, currently Headmaster of Hogwarts.
For I‘m the Hogwarts Sorting Hat And I can cap them all.
Below, in a shadowy clearing, stood Snape, but he wasn‘t alone.
‘What do you see when you look in the Mirror?‘
Smeltings boys wore maroon tailcoats, orange knickerbockers and flat straw hats called boaters.
‘All right.‘ Ron gritted his teeth and stepped carefully over the dog‘s legs.
Two of us will help you, whichever you would find,
Your detention will take place at eleven o‘clock tonight.
‘Forget I said it! Hey - where‘re yeh goin‘?‘
‘Seekers are always the ones who get nobbled by the other team.‘
‘When I call your name, you will put on the hat and sit on the stool to be sorted,‘ she said.
One winter cloak (black, silver fastenings)
He turned on his heel and with a swish of his cloak he was gone.
Piers was a scrawny boy with a face like a rat.
They could feel the dog‘s hot, smelly breath as they approached the giant heads.
‘A sherbet lemon. They‘re a kind of Muggle sweet I‘m rather fond of.‘
In the end the guard strode away, muttering about time-wasters.
‘ Hagrid drew himself up proudly. ‘He usually gets me ter do important stuff fer him.
Her lips tightened as they always did if he dared to ask a question.
The rat was still snoozing on Ron‘s lap.
The library was pitch black and very eerie.
‘Go to your cupboard - I mean, your bedroom,‘ he wheezed at Harry.
‘What‘s basketball?‘ said Wood curiously.
‘Go to Madam Pomfrey,‘ Hermione suggested.
Harry longed to know what it was, but knew better than to ask.
See, there was this wizard who went ... bad.
Great drops beat on the roof of the car.
‘You‘re saying it wrong,‘ Harry heard Hermione snap.
Harry pulled back his fringe to show the lightning scar.
‘Hang on, I think I remember him saying something about it,‘ said the other twin.
‘So you mean the Stone‘s only safe as long as Quirrell stands up to Snape?‘ said Hermione in alarm.
‘Now, what‘s the platform number?‘ said the boys‘ mother.
‘Master, I cannot hold him - my hands - my hands!‘
‘Don‘t worry, ickle Ronniekins is safe with us.‘
‘I‘d best get this bike away. G‘night, Professor McGonagall - Professor Dumbledore, sir.‘
‘Unicorn hair‘s nearly poking out. Anyway
Harry and Hermione walked back to the castle, feeling Saturday couldn‘t come quickly enough.
He hurried out from behind the bar, rushed towards Harry and seized his hand, tears in his eyes.
Then Hagrid‘s voice rang out, saying, ‘Back, Fang - hack.‘
He could just see the bundle of blankets on the step of number four.
The Nimbus Two Thousand turned wherever he wanted at his lightest touch.
Third, as you see clearly, all are different size,
‘Yeah - but we‘ll go back in this. Not s‘posed ter use magic now I‘ve got yeh.‘
‘True, I haven‘t introduced meself. Rubeus Hagrid, Keeper of Keys and Grounds at Hogwarts.‘
‘I want Fang,‘ said Malfoy quickly, looking at Fang‘s long teeth.
Neville, indeed, looked as if he‘d never speak again.
‘I demand that you leave at once, sir!‘ he said.
We are pleased to inform you that you have a place at Hogwarts School of Witchcraft and Wizardry.
‘Snape‘s refereeing?‘ he spluttered through a mouthful of mud.
‘How are you supposed to keep your eyes on all three heads at once?‘
‘Having a last meal, Potter? When are you getting the train back to the Muggles?‘
The castle felt more like home than Privet Drive had ever done.
‘I know he‘s not very nice, but he wouldn‘t try and steal something Dumbledore was keeping safe.‘
Perhaps it was also my concern for Arun that drew me back.
‘I mean, after that open and revolting foul - ‘
Harry could see Uncle Vernon‘s shiny black shoes pacing up and down the kitchen.
Now he was back to staring around for the Snitch.
‘Yeh‘ve done wrong an‘ now yeh‘ve got ter pay fer it.
And that was why I couldn’t bring myself to rob him.
Someone was outside, knocking to come in.
Hagrid looked down at his umbrella and stroked his beard.
‘What‘s the matter with you? You look terrible.‘
‘Look!‘ said Malfoy, darting forward and snatching something out of the grass.
They were quiet for a time, watching the fields and lanes flick past.
He‘d forgotten all about the people in cloaks until he passed a group of them next to the baker‘s.
‘You‘re in luck, Weasley, Potter‘s obviously spotted some money on the ground!‘ said Malfoy.
Harry and Ron headed upstairs, smothering their laughter at Malfoy‘s obvious rage and confusion.
Caught by surprise, Harry fell hard on the concrete floor.
Then, one breakfast time, Hedwig brought Harry another not from Hagrid.
He stroked the door gently with one of his long fingers and it simply melted away.
‘I didn‘t know it was called that, sir.‘
‘We have much to be thankful for. Would you care for a sherbet lemon?‘
People stared more than ever on the train.
‘We know Oliver‘s speech by heart,‘ Fred told Harry.
Harry, who was starting to feel warm and sleepy, looked up at the High Table again.
People jostled him on their way to platforms nine and ten.
They walked more slowly, ears straining for the faintest sound.
Professor McGonagall blew her nose in reply.
Harry and Ron were followed into their boat by Neville and Hermione.
‘Peeves,‘ Percy whispered to the first-years.
‘Everyone in?‘ shouted Hagrid, who had a boat to himself, ‘Right then - FORWARD! ‘
Aunt Petunia wouldn‘t have let it in the house.
‘Budge up, yeh great lump,‘ said the stranger.
‘You can‘t send people off in Quidditch - and what‘s a red cd?‘
More silence followed this little speech.
Harry stuffed the Cloak quickly out of sight.
Twice, Ron only just noticed in time that Harry and Hermione were in danger.
‘If any dog needs exercise, that one does.‘
‘I - I know I can‘t keep him for ever, but I can‘t jus‘ dump him, I can‘t.
Professor McGonagall now stepped forward holding a long roll of parchment.
‘You don‘t use your eyes, any of you, do you?‘ she snapped.
Hagrid greeted them looking flushed and excited.
‘Wood told us. We‘re on the team too - Beaters.‘
‘Everyone stand by a broomstick. Come on, hurry up.‘
Flocks of owls ... shooting stars ... Well, they‘re not completely stupid.
Ron was in a very bad temper by the end of the class.
‘I thought you weren‘t speaking to us?‘ said Harry.
There had been a flying motorbike in it.
The clock on the wall had just chimed midnight when the portrait hole burst open.
Harry had been quite right to think she wasn‘t a teacher to cross.
Even Neville scraped through, his good Herbology mark making up for his abysmal Potions one.
The rest of the team landed next to George to complain, too.
While they had been talking, the train had carried them out of London.
Hagrid, meanwhile, was counting bricks in the wall above the dustbin.
Harry wished he had about eight more eyes.
Then she changed her desk into a pig and back again.
Quirrell‘s head looked strangely small without it.
He bent down and freed one of the Bludgers.
‘Still famous,‘ said Ron, grinning at him.
In the morning, he would probably have given me a rupee to go to the movies.
‘Oh, Neville,‘ he heard the old woman sigh.
Harry, Ron and Hermione looked at each other, wondering what to tell him.
‘Must be,‘ said Percy, frowning at Dumbledore.
It was a relief to be away from the smell of the troll, quite apart from anything else.
Harry sighed and stretched out on the bed.
‘Well, that‘s something,‘ Harry muttered to the others.
Slipping and stumbling, they followed Hagrid down what seemed to be a steep, narrow path.
Dudley‘s snores were drowned by the low rolls of thunder that started near midnight.
Harry‘s seemed to be picking up every sigh of the wind, every cracking twig.
‘How often do you check to see if anyone‘s inside?‘ Harry asked.
‘Will you look at this? I‘ve got some presents!‘
‘I wish I knew what this means!‘ he burst out angrily.
He was usually the one who held people‘s arms behind their backs while Dudley hit them.
The shouting and the echoes seemed to be driving the troll berserk.
It must be something really horrible, or Filch wouldn‘t be sounding so delighted.
The narrow path had opened suddenly on to the edge of a great black lake.
A few old women were sitting in a corner, drinking tiny glasses of sherry.
‘But I expect you‘ve realised by now what it does?‘
‘Your father would have been proud,‘ she said.
Harry and Ron went back to the common room.
Harry had taken one step towards it when a slithering sound made him freeze where he stood.
‘Delighted, Mr Potter, just can‘t tell you. Diggle‘s the name, Dedalus Diggle.‘
Next second he was looking at the black inside of the hat.
‘It‘s an Invisibility Cloak,‘ said Ron, a look of awe on his face.
Just as Ron started moaning that his feet were dead with cold, Harry spotted the suit of armour.
‘It‘s either really valuable or really dangerous,‘ said Ron.
‘Wanted one ever since I was a kid - here we go.‘
He rolled on to his back and tried to remember the dream he had been having.
They weren‘t in a room, as he had supposed.
‘Ron, you‘ve got something on your nose.‘
‘But if we get caught, you two will be expelled, too.‘
‘How exactly do they sort us into houses?‘ he asked Ron.
Professor McGonagall was sweeping along without even looking at him; he had to jog to keep up.
His Aunt Petunia was awake and it was her shrill voice which made the first noise of the day.
‘You are sure which is which, aren‘t you?‘
‘Nine and three-quarters!‘ piped a small girl, also red-headed, who was holding her hand.
Harry‘s victory faded from his mind as he watched.
Hagrid seized his umbrella and whirled it over his head.
Professor McGonagall turned to Harry and Ron.
She had short, grey hair and yellow eyes like a hawk.
About ten minutes later, four broomsticks came swooping down out of the darkness.
The whole Hall burst into applause as the hat finished its song.
He looked so dangerous with half his moustache missing that no one dared argue.
On the other hand, I know that I shall remember all my life that Todd owes me a dollar.
‘Please, Professor McGonagall - they were looking for me.‘
Hagrid‘s beard twitched and they could tell he was smiling.
He didn‘t know what he was going to - but it had to be better than what he was leaving behind.
Smiling and waving at him from every page were his mother and father.
‘Rubbish,‘ said Hagrid, who hadn‘t heard a word of what had gone on next to him in the stands.
He was the most trusting person I had ever met.
‘And no wonder we couldn‘t find Flamel in that Study of Recent Developments in Wizardry,‘ said Ron.
Dumbledore turned and walked back down the street.
The greedy man shows panic, the rich man shows anger, the poor man shows fear.
‘Er - yes, they did, yes,‘ said Hagrid, shuffling his feet.
It seemed as though life would be back to normal next year, or as normal as it ever was at Hogwarts.
He wore glasses, and his hair was very untidy.
‘VOLDEMORT!‘ Harry bellowed, and Hagrid was so shocked, he stopped crying.
‘That does look good,‘ said the ghost in the ruff sadly, watching Harry cut up his steak.
And she left, taking the toadless boy with her.
At this, Neville let out a little moan and Malfoy stopped dead in his tracks.
Mr Dursley wondered whether he dared tell her he‘d heard the name ‘Potter‘.
The troll was advancing on her, knocking the sinks off the walls as it went.
‘I don‘t want more trouble,‘ he mumbled.
I asked him one day what his trip cost him and he said that he had kept no accounts.
‘Now, can you think what the Mirror of Erised shows us all?‘ Harry shook his head.
‘Professor Dumbledore left ten minutes ago,‘ she said coldly.
The evening air had never smelled so sweet.
‘What‘s his name again? Howard, isn‘t it?‘
Everyone fell about laughing except Hermione, who leapt up and performed the counter-curse.
‘Sorry,‘ said Harry, ‘but what‘s curious?‘
Ron threw the Cloak back over them as the luminous eyes of Mrs Norris came round the door.
Don‘t ask questions - that was the first rule for a quiet life with the Dursleys.
‘Hogwarts, dear?‘ she said, when Harry started to speak.
‘It‘s Wing- gar-dium Levi-o-sa, make the “gar” nice and long.‘
Snape put them all into pairs and set them to mixing up a simple potion to cure boils.
They didn‘t stop running until they reached the portrait of the Fat Lady on the seventh floor.
‘We had to, Neville, no time to explain,‘ said Harry.
‘You can come tonight, I‘m going back, I want to show you the mirror.‘
Ron dived at Malfoy just as Snape came up the stairs.
The whole shack shivered and Harry sat bolt upright, staring at the door.
He was carrying his large crossbow, and a quiver of arrows hung over his shoulder.
So Malfoy, jealous and angry, had gone back to taunting Harry about having no proper family.
‘Oh, it‘s you, Ronan,‘ said Hagrid in relief.
‘No - I don‘t believe it - he‘s gone back to sleep.‘
‘Right, here‘s what we‘ve got to do,‘ he whispered urgently.
He merely said that the temperature was up to nearly a hundred.
‘Well, what are you all waiting for?‘ she barked.
Harry went back to the kitchen, still staring at his letter.
‘I‘ll take them,‘ said Uncle Vernon, standing up quickly and following her from the dining-room.
‘Hogwarts, Hogwarts, Hoggy Warty Hogwarts,
He had astonishingly blue eyes, like pale sapphires.
It was a while before any of them said anything.
Harry heard the hat shout the last word to the whole Hall.
Harry saw the ghost of the Fat Friar waving merrily at her.
Ron‘s eyes strayed to the pile of Chocolate Frogs waiting to be unwrapped.
‘Goodness, didn‘t you know, I‘d have found out everything I could if it was me,‘ said Hermione.
‘Yes - of course - but there‘s no wood!‘ Hermione cried, wringing her hands.
‘You don‘t understand,‘ said Harry, ‘this is important.‘
‘The smallest bottle will get us through the black fire - towards the Stone.‘
‘I ... don‘t ... want ... him ... t-t-to come!‘ Dudley yelled between huge pretend sobs.
He paid seven gold Galleons for his wand and Mr Ollivander bowed them from his shop.
He let the material flow over his hands, smoother than silk, light as air.
The countryside now flying past the window was becoming wilder.
‘Oh, you‘re going to fight us, are you?‘ Malfoy sneered.
‘Ah, go boil yer heads, both of yeh,‘ said Hagrid.
‘Prefects,‘ he rumbled, ‘lead your houses back to the dormitories immediately!‘
Two well-oiled men slid about in the soft mud, grunting and slapping their thighs.
Harry must have walked straigh past him, so desperate to get to the mirror he hadn‘t noticed him.
Slytherin Seeker Terence Higgs had seen it, too.
‘You‘ve got to stand up to him, Neville!‘ said Ron.
He hadn‘t seen the fire, but he seemed to be looking for a reason to tell them off anyway.
Harry looked at the grandfather clock by the door.
‘SILENCE!‘ yelled Uncle Vernon, and a couple of spiders fell from the ceiling.
Even Dudley who never read anything, would have been wild to get his hands on some of these.
Scowling, Malfoy quickly dropped the Remembrall back on the table.
The Dursleys had a small son called Dudley and in their opinion there was no finer boy anywhere.
Before Malfoy knew what was happening, Ron was on top of him, wrestling him to the ground.
‘Next to the tall kid with the red hair.‘
‘Something you have to say is more important than the Ministry of Magic, Potter?‘
She had also lent him Quidditch through the Ages, which turned out to be a very interesting read.
‘If you‘re going to be cursed for ever, death‘s better, isn‘t it?‘
‘Hagrid! Look! Red sparks, the others are in trouble!‘
Harry kept to his room, with his new owl for company.
‘But you don‘t use them?‘ said Mr Ollivander sharply.
‘Yeah,‘ said Hagrid in a very muffled voice.
But today nothing was going to go wrong.
He grunted and offered him another rock cake.
‘Mrs Figg‘s broken her leg. She can‘t take him.‘ She jerked her head in Harry‘s direction.
Harry and Ron tried to look as though this story wasn‘t new to them.
He couldn‘t see how they were goi to get out of trouble this time.
They leant out of the window for her to kiss them goodbye and their younger sister began to cry.
Harry had suddenly gone into a spectacular dive, which drew gasps and cheers from the crowd.
‘Ready?‘ Harry asked the other two, his hand on the door handle.
‘The thing is - the thing is, I don‘t know how to -‘
‘Dunno,‘ said Hagrid casually, ‘he wouldn‘ take his cloak off.
‘And now, before we go to bed, let us sing the school song!‘ cried Dumbledore.
But in all the confusion, of course, the Golden Snitch had disappeared from sight again.
It was old and some of the twigs stuck out at odd angles.
Hermione Granger‘s had simply rolled over on the ground and Neville‘s hadn‘t moved at all.
‘We were wondering if you could tell us what‘s guarding the Philosopher‘s Stone apart from Fluffy.‘
How they managed to get the crate back up to the castle, they never knew.
‘And did he - did he seem interested in Fluffy?‘ Harry asked, trying to keep his voice calm.
Heart hammering, Harry pushed his trolley after them.
‘The one we‘ve all been waiting for,‘ said George.
‘You‘d better get out, then. Go on - out!‘
‘I liked him a lot - great with animals.‘
I opened it that the dollar would be in it.
‘I will, sir, I most certainly will,‘ said Peeves, rising up in the air again.
There was no mistaking that silver beard.
HOGWARTS SCHOOL OF WITCHCRAFT AND WIZARDRY
This, he supposed, was the crash, though he couldn‘t imagine where all the green light came from.
Even the endless rain that had replaced the snow couldn‘t dampen his spirits.
He took off his thick black coat and threw it to Harry.
‘They‘re in here somewhere,‘ they heard him mutter, ‘probably hiding.‘
He put Hagrid‘s flute to his lips and blew.
Down in the stands, Dean Thomas was yelling, ‘Send him off, ref! Red card!‘
Uncle Vernon seized Harry around the waist and threw him into the hall.
‘I‘m not trying to be brave or anything, saying the name,‘ said Harry.
But in the meantime, a thought—a rather painful thought—has begun to come into my mind at intervals.
It put its hand into its pocket and pulled out a blood-red stone.
He was very glad they had Hagrid and his crossbow with them.
Harry wandered over to the Restricted Section.
Reckon Dumbledore‘s the only one You-Know-Who was afraid of.
‘Er - I don‘t know any,‘ Harry confessed.
Now they were speeding past fields full of cows and sheep.
‘They were a witch and wizard, if that‘s what you mean.‘
‘Watching - spying - might be following us,‘ muttered Uncle Vernon wildly.
Questions exploded inside Harry‘s head like fireworks and he couldn‘t decide which to ask first.
‘No, we‘re not. Why don‘t you go to bed, Neville?‘
We await your owl by no later than 31 July.
‘I almost told your brother,‘ Hermione snapped.
‘And women,‘ said Chaser Angelina Johnson.
‘A poltergeist.‘ He raised his voice, ‘Peeves - show yourself.‘
Hagrid was the only one who ever sent him letters.
It’s easy to rob a greedy man because he deserves to be robbed.
Harry tried - but he had hardly raised the wand when it, too, was snatched back by Mr Ollivander.
‘So there‘s someone called Nicolas Flamel involved, is there?‘
‘There isn‘t a reserve Seeker. If I back out, Gryffindor can‘t play at all.‘
As he drew closer, he heard Quirrell‘s voice.
She had started drawing up revision timetables and colour-coding all her notes.
Harry turned and saw the Dursleys drive away.
The old woman with the pipe was puffing on it without realising it had gone out.
‘Only joking, I am Fred,‘ said the boy, and off he went.
The Dursleys knew that the Potters had a small son, too, but they had never even seen him.
The cat‘s tail twitched and its eyes narrowed.
‘They oughta change the rules, Flint coulda knocked Harry outta the air.‘
‘Must get on - lots ter buy. Come on, Harry.‘
‘Yeah, but I was meanin‘ anythin‘ unusual a bit nearer home,‘ said Hagrid.
But it’s difficult to rob a poor man, especially one who really doesn’t care if he’s robbed.
However, old chessmen weren‘t a drawback at all.
On Friday, no fewer than twelve letters arrived for Harry.
‘I always said he was off his rocker,‘ said Ron, looking quite impressed at how mad his hero was
‘Obviously, you‘ve just done so,‘ Dumbledore smiled.
Harry wondered what their punishment was going to be.
A voice echoed through the train: ‘We will be reaching Hogwarts in five minutes‘ time.
‘Students aren‘t supposed to know about the Philosopher‘s Stone, after all.‘
But a moment later, the reflection smiled at him.
A wild-looking old woman dressed all in green had waved merrily at him once on a bus.
Harry walked round and round his new room.
Written in narrow, loopy writing he had never seen before were the following words:
Harry laughed, but he was one of the few who did.
It was bright gold and had little fluttering silver wings.
‘Turpin, Lisa‘ became a Ravenclaw and then it was Ron‘s turn.
Mr Ollivander was flitting around the shelves, taking down boxes.
The owl then fluttered on to the floor and began to attack Hagrid‘s coat.
‘Do you?‘ said the boy, with a slight sneer.
He was curled up on the floor, fast asleep, but jerked suddenly awake as they crept nearer.
He saw his reflection, pale and scared-looking at first.
Hagrid would never tell anyone how to get past Fluffy ... never ... but
The storm raged more and more ferociously as the night went on.
‘Harry. Nasty, common name, if you ask me.‘
Harry threw the Cloak around his shoulders and Ron gave a yell.
‘He‘s late, maybe he‘s chickened out,‘ Ron whispered.
They heard him zooming away, rattling coats of armour as he passed.
‘He was an excellent Quidditch player himself.‘
Perched on top of the rock was the most miserable little shack you could imagine.
‘Wow,‘ Ron sighed, as the broomstick rolled on to Harry‘s bedspread.
Uncle Vernon stopped at last outside a gloomy-looking hotel on the outskirts of a big city.
‘Now, wait quietly, Potter. I need to examine this interesting mirror.‘
Neville whimpered as boils started to pop up all over his nose.
Uncle Vernon, who had gone very pale, whispered something that sounded like ‘Mimblewimble‘.
‘Five, you mean, once she‘s taken off Hermione‘s.‘
Harry and Hermione stayed quiet, watching Ron think.
The Fat Lady had gone on a night-time visit and Hermione was locked out of Gryffindor Tower.
When they shook their heads, he wailed, ‘I‘ve lost him! He keeps getting away from me!‘