I was still a thief when I met Arun and though I was only fifteen, I was an experienced and fairly successful hand. 

Arun was watching the wrestlers when I approached him. He was about twenty, a tall, lean fellow, and he looked kind and simple enough for my purpose. I hadn’t had much luck of late and thought I might be able to get into this young person’s confidence. He seemed quite fascinated by the wrestling. Two well-oiled men slid about in the soft mud, grunting and slapping their thighs. When I drew Arun into conversation, he didn’t seem to realise I was a stranger. 

“You look like a wrestler yourself,” I said. “So do you,” he replied, which surprised me for a moment because at the time I was rather thin and bony and not very impressive physically. “Yes,” I said. “I wrestle sometimes.” 

“What's your name?” he asked. I lied and called myself Deepak. 

Deepak was about my fifth name. I had earlier called myself Ranbir, Sudhir, Trilok and Surinder. After this preliminary exchange, Arun stuck to only commenting on the match, and I too didn’t have much to say. After a while, he walked away from the crowd of spectators. I followed him. 

“Hello!” he said, “Are you enjoying yourself?” I gave him my most appealing smile and mentioned that I wanted to work for him. He continued walking and spoke—“And what makes you think I want someone to work for me?” “Well,” I said, 

“I’ve been wandering about all day looking for the best person to work for. When I saw you, I knew that no one else had a chance.” 

“You flatter me,” he said. “That's all right,” I replied. He added, “But you can’t work for me.” “Why not?” I asked. He clarified— “Because I can’t pay you.” 

I thought that over for a minute. Perhaps I had misjudged my man. “Can you feed me?” I asked. “Can you cook?” he countered. “I can cook,” I lied. “If you can cook,” he said, “I'll feed you.” 

He took me to his room and told me I could sleep in the verandah. But I was nearly back on the street that night. The meal I cooked must have been pretty awful because Arun gave it to the neighbour's cat and told me to be off. But I just hung around smiling quietly and then he couldn’t help laughing. He then asked me to come back in, patted me on the head and said, “Never mind, I'll teach you to cook in the morning.” Not only did he teach me to cook but he taught me to write my name and his. He also said he would soon teach me to write whole sentences, and add money on paper when there wasn’t any in the pocket! 

It was quite pleasant working for Arun. I made the tea in the morning and later went out shopping. I would take my time buying the day’s supplies and make a profit of about twenty-five paise a day. I would tell Arun that rice was fifty-six paise a pound (it generaliy was), but I would get it at fifty paise a pound. I think he knew I made a little this way but he didn’t mind. He wasn’t giving me a regular salary. 

I was really grateful to Arun for teaching me to write. I knew that once I could write like an educated man, there would be no limit to what I could achieve. It might even be an incentive to be honest.The bed. I had been working for Arun for nearly a fortnight and, apart from the shopping hadn’t done much to exploit him. I had every opportunity for doing so. I had a key to the front door, which meant I could enter the room whenever Arun was out. 

He was the most trusting person I had ever met. And that was why I couldn’t bring myself to rob him. It’s easy to rob a greedy man because he deserves to be robbed. It’s easy to rob a rich man because he can afford to be robbed. But it’s difficult to rob a poor man, especially one who really doesn’t care if he’s robbed. A rich man or a greedy man or a careful man wouldn’t keep his money under a pillow or mattress. He'd lock it up in a safe place. Arun had put his money where it would be child’s play for me to remove it without his knowledge. 

“It’s time I did some real work,” I told myself. “I’m getting out of practice...If I don’t take the money, he'll only waste it on his friends...He doesn’t even pay me...” 

Arun was asleep. Moonlight seeped in from the verandah and fell across the bed. I sat up on the floor, my blanket wrapped round me, considering the situation. There was quite a lot of money in that wad and if I took it, I would have to leave town. I might make the 10.30 Express to Amritsar. 

Slipping out of the blanket, I crept up to the bed and peeped at Arun. He was sleeping peacefully with a soft and easy breathing. His face was clear and unlined. Even I had more markings on my face, though mine were mostly scars. 

My hand took on an identity of its own as it slid around under the mattress, the fingers searching for the notes. They found them and I drew them out without a crackle. 

Arun sighed in his sleep and turned on his side, towards me. 

My free hand was resting on the bed and his hair touched my fingers. I was frightened when this happened and crawled quickly and quietly out of the room. When I was in the street, I began to run. I ran down the bazaar road to the station. The shops were all closed. Suddenly, I felt I had to stop and count the notes though I knew it might make me late for the train. There were about a hundred rupees in fives. A good haul. I could live like a prince for a month or two. 

When I reached the station, I did not stop at the ticket office (I had never bought a ticket in my life) but dashed straight on to the platform. The Amritsar Express was just moving out. It was moving slowly enough for me to be able to jump on the footboard of one of the carriages, but I hesitated for some unexplainable reason. 

I hesitated long enough for the train to leave without me. When it had gone and the noise and busy confusion of the platform had subsided, I found myself standing alone on the deserted platform. The knowledge that I had a hundred stolen rupees in my pocket only increased my feeling of isolation. I had no idea where to spend the night. I had never kept any friends because sometimes friends can be one’s undoing. I didn’t want to make myself conspicuous by staying at a hotel. And the only person I knew really well in town was the person I had robbed! 

Leaving the station, I walked slowly through the bazaar, keeping to dark, deserted alleys. I kept thinking of Arun. He would still be asleep, blissfully unaware of his loss. 

I have made a study of men’s faces when they have lost something of material value. The greedy man shows panic, the rich man shows anger, the poor man shows fear. But I knew that none of these emotions would show on Arun’s face when he discovered the theft. There would be a terrible sadness not for the loss of the money but for my having betrayed his trust. 

I found myself on the maidan and sat down on a bench. The night was chilly and I regretted not having brought Arun’s blanket along. A light drizzle added to my discomfort. Soon it was raining heavily. 

I got wet and a cold wind brought the rain whipping across my face. Sleeping on a bench was something I should have been used to by now but the verandah had softened me. 

I walked back to the bazaar and sat down on the steps of a closed shop. A few vagrants lay beside me, rolled up tight in thin blankets. The clock showed midnight. I felt for the notes. They were still with me but had gone damp with rainwater. This was Arun’s money. In the morning, he would probably have given me a rupee to go to the movies. But now I had it all. No more cooking his meals, running to the bazaar, or learning to write whole sentences. Whole sentences ... 

They were something I had forgotten in the excitement of a hundred rupees. Whole sentences, I knew, could one day bring me more than a hundred rupees. It was a simple matter to steal but to be a really big man, a wise and successful man, that was something. I should go back to Arun, I told myself, if only to learn how to write. 

Perhaps it was also my concern for Arun that drew me back. 

A sense of sympathy was one of my weaknesses, and through hesitation over a theft I had often been caught. A successful thief must be pitiless. I was fond of Arun. My affection for him, my sense of sympathy, but most of all my desire to write whole sentences drew me back to the room. 

I hurried back to the room extremely nervous, for it is easier to steal something than to return it undetected. If I was caught beside the bed now, with the money in my hand, or with my hand under the mattress, there could be only one explanation—that I was actually stealing. If Arun woke up, I would be lost. 

I opened the door clumsily and stood in the doorway. Gradually my eyes became accustomed to the darkness of the room. Arun was still asleep. I crept noiselessly to the head of the bed. My hand came up with the notes. I felt his easy breath on my fingers. I was fascinated by his tranquil features and remained motionless for a minute. Then my hand explored the mattress, found the edge and slipped the notes under it. 

I awoke late next morning to find that Arun had already made the tea. I found it difficult to face him in the harsh light of day. 

His hand was stretched out towards me. There was a five-rupee note between his fingers. My heart sank. “I made some mone yyesterday,” he said. “Now you'll get paid regularly.” My spirit rose as rapidly as it had fallen. I congratulated myself on having returned the money. But when I took the note, I realised that he knew everything. The note was still wet from last night’s rain. 

“Today, I'll teach you to write a little more than your name,” he said. He knew but neither his lips nor his eyes said anything about their knowing. I smiled at Arun in my most appealing way. And the smile came by itself, without my knowing it. 

